“Russian warship, go fuck yourself!” This forthright, gutsy message, first uttered on February 24th by a Ukrainian guard on Snake Island in the Black Sea, is but one symbol of Ukrainian resistance in the face of Russia’s assault. A version of the slogan is plastered on billboards and postage stamps. Since April it has featured in the rousing chorus of a song with an equally succinct title: “Don’t Fuck with Ukraine”. Like everyone in the country, artists and producers are doing their bit, making fearless, snarky tunes that poke fun at Russia, which often go viral on platforms such as TikTok and Telegram. “Don’t Fuck with Ukraine” was written by Max Barskih, a Ukrainian pop star, while he was serving in the army. “I saw the bravery of our soldiers, the power, the strength and that’s how the song was born,” he explains. With a thunderous beat, combative lyrics (“fight for peace in my land/enemies laying dead”) and an expletive-laden chorus, the song is a radical departure from the tracks Mr Barskih is famous for. A female voice sings “Russian warship, go fuck yourself” in the polyphonic style of Ukrainian folk music. Rapping in English allows Mr Barskih to reach the widest possible audience and so drum up support for Ukraine’s fight. Wartime anthems have long aspired to denigrate the enemy and boost morale. “The main purpose for this and other songs”, says Daniil Marin, “is to lift the soldiers’ and [nation’s] spirit up.” Mr Marin, a musician, produced the track with Mr Barskih while sheltering in an underground car park in Kyiv. He says he receives messages telling him that soldiers on the frontline are listening to it. Maintaining unity is vital. This is the purpose of “Bayraktar”, an upbeat folk tune that celebrates Ukrainian victories, written for the army by Taras Borovok. The lyrics mock Russia’s military failures and celebrate Selcuk Bayraktar, the engineer behind the tb2 drone, a Turkish-made weapon which Ukraine has used to strike Russian targets. (“It makes ghosts of Russian bandits, Bayraktar!”) In a cover by a group of Ukrainian troops, musicians clad in fatigues play amid burnt-out tanks, their machine guns jiggling as they dance—a tongue-in-cheek, inventive style that encapsulates Ukraine’s resilience, wit and determination. Other songs express the country’s refusal to be cowed by the aggressor. “vova, iBash ix Blyad” splices a sweary speech by Oleksandr Povoroznyuk, the well-known president of a football club in central Ukraine, over the sort of chunky, steroidal bass that might be played in a nightclub. Roughly translated, the song’s title calls for Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky—“Vova”—to unleash hell on Russia, only in more colourful language. The uproariously funny music video features a clip from “Servant of the People”, the popular Ukrainian comedy television series in which Mr Zelensky, then an actor, wields a machine gun. It has garnered more than 3.3m views on YouTube, and typifies the blend of comedy and patriotism that has kept people going during the darkest days of war. This is what it means to be Ukrainian, says Tetiana Konieva, a music-marketing specialist who left her hometown near Kyiv in April. “We laugh, sing, cry, laugh, sing, cry.” This ironic style of making music by mixing speeches with rap emerged during the Orange revolution in 2004, when massive demonstrations overturned a rigged election. Then a hip-hop track by Greenjolly called “Razom nas Bahato, Nas Ne Podolaty” (“Together we are many, we cannot be defeated”) became the anthem of the protests. The same year Verka Serduchka, a standup drag comedian, uttered the famous line “Get out of Ukraine, ugly Russian” during a show in Kyiv. Jerry Heil, a Ukrainian singer with a big TikTok following, samples this exchange in a recent track of the same name, looping the comic’s words over an electronic beat while the verse riffs on a patriotic folk song. The video is also a spoof: Mr Zelensky’s face is pasted onto cartoon Cossacks from a children’s series of the 1960s. This fiery, funny music demonstrates the people of Ukraine’s ability to find humour and stick together in the face of daunting odds. “Putin has basically created his worst nightmare of a united Ukraine,” explains Adriana Helbig of the University of Pittsburgh, who has written a book about Ukrainian hip-hop. “Everybody has this shared song and history now.” She notes that since the invasion began, songs traditionally sung in the western parts of the country have become rallying cries all over it. And since these songs are enjoyed on social media by young audiences elsewhere, they play a role in maintaining international support for Ukraine’s struggle. For how much longer must war and resistance suffuse its music? Ukrainians are “fighters for freedom”, says Mr Barskih. He suggests they will fight, and sing, until it is achieved. ■