No major act in pop music had a career so brief and lurid as did the Sex Pistols. From their first gig in November 1975 to their dissolution was a span of just 26 months. They brought with them a movement known as punk—all leather jackets, spiky hair and safety pins—which succeeded in a conscious and deliberate effort to upend British popular culture. Punk spread shock waves around the world that are still felt to this day. Or so the story goes. Is it true? Yes and no. The first person to retrospectively frame punk’s narrative was the band’s manager, Malcolm McLaren, the orchestrator of the entire episode according to, well, Malcolm McLaren. Though he was undoubtedly significant, his recollection was invariably to his own advantage. In the mockumentary film “The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle” (1980), directed by Julien Temple, McLaren depicted himself as an ingenious impresario and puppet-master executing to perfection a grand and brilliant plan. Every great cultural moment is subject to mythmaking: an orthodoxy solidifies around it, reinforced year after year by repetition and embellishment. In 1978, only eight years after the break-up of the Beatles, Eric Idle’s mockumentary film “All You Need Is Cash” (aka “The Rutles”) was able to spoof not so much the group itself as the received wisdom surrounding both the band and the Sixties as a whole. Punk has come to rival that era as a subject for mythmaking, and for much the same reasons. People (mostly men) to whose youth it was central gained hold of the levers of production in media. They commissioned and wrote articles and books, filmed documentaries and produced screenplays. Thus punk’s pre-eminence has become self-sustaining. “Pistol” (pictured), a six-part mini-series written by Craig Pearce (who co-wrote the most celebrated films of Baz Luhrmann) and directed by Danny Boyle (“Trainspotting”, “28 Days Later”), offers a familiar version of events. The show is based on the memoir of Steve Jones, the Sex Pistols’ guitarist, who was with the band from its inauspicious infancy to its ignominious end. “Pistol” hews close to the orthodoxy: McLaren is a genius Svengali who destroys the boring old order and transforms the world forever and for the better. The band themselves are pawns, albeit truculent and unruly ones, in McLaren’s master plan. It is, in effect, punk’s holy text in historical costume-drama form. The trouble with historical costume dramas is their tendency to render events as predestined. Characters are ciphers who exist only to bring about those events. They speak in aphorisms and exposition. They recite overarching context as if recounting it to the audience rather than living through it. “Pistol”, unfortunately, is no exception. It encapsulates perhaps the most enduring myth of punk, a myth that tends to attach itself to any historical upheaval: that everybody who was involved in it had the prophetic ability to think about it, and talk about it, exactly the way that people might all these years later. Real life encompasses no such inevitability, nor benefit of hindsight. In 2000, some 20 years after “The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle”, Mr Temple felt impelled to set the record straight with a follow-up documentary, “The Filth and the Fury”, presenting the band members’ point—or rather, points—of view. Here viewers saw McLaren not as an all-knowing wizard but as an inspired mischief-maker whose talent lay chiefly in provoking events he could neither foresee nor control, then claiming credit for the outcome. Mr Temple’s later film remains the most persuasive account of the Pistols’ own story. Michael Bracewell, the author of “Souvenir”, a recent book on the period, also offers a bracing corrective to the accepted narrative. He argues that the movement has always been multifarious and reimagined by its beholder. “Some people saw punk as nothing more than a chance to go nuts and have a beer fight,” he says. “Yet others saw it as a nihilistic expression of the implosion of post-war modernity. Then there were those who would accept nothing other than that punk was class war, pure and simple. But that was alongside those for whom it was all just catwalk fodder in waiting.” Does that make the mythos of punk altogether false? It was indeed revolutionary and transformative, its music is still influential and “punk” remains a byword for rebellious attitude. Yet its targets survived and reasserted themselves—not least the dinosaurs of rock whose extinction punk supposedly portended. It changed everything for a moment, then changed relatively little thereafter. “Some of us tend to overthink the whole punk phenomenon,” Mr Bracewell says. “The simple reason it endures, most probably, was that the music was so eclectic yet all so thrillingly sharp, fast and new.” ■ “Pistol” is streaming on Hulu now