On july 14th 2021 a flood tore through the Ahr valley, in north-west Germany. None of the towns upon which it visited death and destruction had had warning of how bad it would be. That warning should have been supplied by automatic flood-level gauges sited upstream, in the river itself. It would have permitted evacuation of houses in particular danger. But the gauges were destroyed by the torrent before they could supply meaningful information. Relying on instruments which are, by their very location, vulnerable to being swept away, is hardly an ideal approach to tracking impending floods. But Michael Dietze of gfz, the German Research Centre for Geosciences, suggests an alternative. On May 26th he proposed to the annual meeting of the European Geosciences Union, in Vienna, that a network of seismometers of a sort more usually employed to record earthquakes might do the job. Seismometers record minute ground movements. Their purpose is to listen for vibrations generated by tectonic activity, usually far away. But on that particular day a rather different set of useful signals came to a seismometer operated by Germany’s Central Seismological Observatory. This was, fortuitously, located 1km north of the Ahr’s streambed. And it picked up vibrations caused by the passing deluge. They were not completely unexpected. Research by Dr Dietze and others had already established that seismometers several kilometres from fast mountain rivers can detect the violence with which the waters of a swollen stream pound the banks, and also the din of millions of pebbles, boulders and other debris bouncing along the bottom during a flood. However, when they studied this particular seismometer’s output, he and his colleagues also saw a third, more gradual effect: a tilting of the ground on which the instrument was resting. This was caused by deformation of the local crustal rocks as a result of the sheer weight of the bulge of water speeding through the valley. They had seen something similar before, but only as a consequence of typhoons hitting small islands. Together, says Dr Dietze, these three signals provided a wealth of information, albeit retrospective, about the flood’s behaviour from the moment it came within listening range, about 2km upstream, until it had passed the point closest to the seismometer, after which grid power failed and the measurements stopped. Both the tilting and the vibrations revealed the flood’s direction; the debris noise gave an indication of how much damage to river banks and buildings the passing surge might inflict; and variations in the amplitude of the seismic waves, as the amount of attenuating rock between source and the seismometer changed, made it possible to estimate the speed with which the water mass was travelling downriver. That is 20:20 hindsight, for no means of processing the relevant data were in place. But Dr Dietze reckons a purpose-built system, using three seismographic stations out of reach of the raging waters, could have done this and more. Having several scattered instruments would allow a flood’s front to be located and tracked. It would also permit a fair assessment of the amount of water in the bulge behind that front to be calculated. If this multi-instrument arrangement had been in place last July it could have given Bad Neuenahr-Ahrweiler (pictured), the town worst affected, 30-45 minutes of notice before the flood arrived, and also an estimate of its peak level. At about €3,000 per instrument, this would probably be a good investment for the future in the Ahr valley, and is also worth considering elsewhere. Dr Dietze estimates that 20% of Europe’s surface consists of the kind of upland terrain which abounds with confined, flood-prone valleys like that of the Ahr. About half of this (mostly in the Alps) is already well served by flood-warning systems. But much of the rest is hardly monitored at all. Scattering a few cheap seismometers around these neglected regions might make all the difference next time the local weather misbehaves. ■