This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. Italy is enjoying a rare period of good, and relatively stable, government under the former president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi. But even when its politics are tumultuous and its economy is languishing, Italy exerts a special allure in the English-speaking world and beyond: superficially as accessible as it is delightful, and yet tinged with intrigue and mystery. Here are six books in English that offer the reader keys to understanding a country in which appearances are often deceptive. A Concise History of Italy. By Christopher Duggan. Cambridge University Press; 360 pages; £19.99 How, for a start, do you write a history spanning 16 centuries of a country that did not exist as a state until little more than a 150 years ago? The single most important thing about Italy is that it is both very young—younger than America—and very old (things that have a bearing on the outlook of today’s Italians happened even before 400AD, when Professor Duggan opens his narrative). First published in 1994, his breakneck canter though the story of the peninsula copes more skilfully with the challenge than any other, emphasising the fractured nature of pre-unification (and, indeed, post-unification) Italy right at the outset and giving disproportionate attention to the period since the birth of the state we know today. The latest revised and updated edition, from 2013, is perhaps the best introduction to a complex and contradictory nation. The Italians. By Luigi Barzini. Penguin. Touchstone; 384 pages; $18.99. Penguin; £12.99 The same claim could also be made for this pioneering venture in a field that has since come to be termed cultural psychology. It first appeared in 1964 and some of its references and examples have since been outdated by the changes that have taken place in Italian life. But Luigi Barzini set out to capture the essence of a supposedly unchanging italianità and for the most part he drew on history and language to make his points. Many are as telling now as ever. Few who know his compatriots would quibble with his judgment that “Familiarity never breeds contempt in them” or that, among them, “credulity is the unmentionable sin”. For evidence of his view that “Italians always loved a good entertainer who could stir their emotions and divert them from themselves”, look no further than at the last book on this list and marvel at Barzini’s prescience. More Summer reads• How Super Mario became a global cultural icon• What if the Ottoman Empire had not collapsed?• Hayek, Popper and Schumpeter formulated a response to tyranny• Our Free Exchange columnist considers just how Dickensian China is•Six guides to biology as seen at different scales An Italian Education. By Tim Parks. Grove Atlantic; 352 pages; $18. Vintage; £10.99 Like the late Luigi Barzini, Tim Parks is an insider-outsider, well suited to explaining the idiosyncrasies of one culture to another. The Italian spent much of his early life in America. Mr Parks, a Briton, married an Italian and, although they later divorced, he has lived since in his adopted land. “An Italian Education” deals with the upbringing of his three children. It has less of the wry humour that made his first work of non-fiction, “Italian Neighbours”, such a success. But it is a more rigorous, and enlightening attempt to isolate the factors—the childhood events and omissions, the parental (and, scarcely less importantly, the grandparental) authorisations and refusals—that go into shaping the outlook of an Italian. Like all of Mr Parks’s skilfully crafted works, it is a delight to read. Naples ’44. A World War II Diary of Occupied Italy. By Norman Lewis. Da Capo Press; 192 pages; $15.99. Published in Britain “Naples ’44: An Intelligence Officer in the Italian Labyrinth”; Eland Books; £12.99 It took more than 30 years for Norman Lewis to dig out, edit, shape and publish the diary he kept while serving with British military intelligence in southern Italy after its “liberation” by the Allies. Yet “Naples ’44” has come to be regarded as the greatest of his many fine works. Humorous and harrowing by turns, it somehow contrives never to condescend to its subjects, the people of Naples—famished and humiliated yet possessed of astounding reserves of resilience, ingenuity and good humour. Lewis’s masterpiece is also as good a starting point as any for someone attempting to get to grips with modern Italy. The depths of misery it chronicles make Italy’s subsequent resurrection, albeit helped by America’s Marshall Plan, seem yet more miraculous. The Archipelago: Italy since 1945. By John Foot. Bloomsbury Publishing; 496 pages; $17.99 and £12.99 Arguments could be made for other histories of post-war Italy, notably the late Paul Ginsborg’s splendid, two-volume series: “A History of Contemporary Italy: Society and Politics 1943-1988” and “Italy and its Discontents. 1980-2001”. But they are unapologetically scholarly works, and though John Foot, the professor of modern Italian history at the University of Bristol, is no intellectual slouch, his account is one that non-academic readers will find easier to digest. By its author’s own account, it is “an eclectic history, linked to my own preferences, experiences and passions”. In a single chapter, he manages to wind together the invention of Padania, the nation conjured from thin air by the Northern League; the cult of Padre Pio; and the scarcely less fervent ones that surround the cyclist Marco Pantani and the writer Oriana Fallaci. “The Archipelago” also has the merit of bringing its readers almost to the present day. The Sack of Rome: Media + Money + Celebrity = Power = Silvio Berlusconi. By Alexander Stille. Penguin; 384 pages; $18.00 At last—you might think—an American author, albeit the son of an Italian journalist. It is remarkable that so few good books about Italy have come from the country whose inhabitants love it more than any other. Alexander Stille, who has also written books on Italy’s fascist dictatorship and the Mafia, provides an exception to the rule in this perceptive and illuminating study of Italy’s most successful post-war politician. Clownish, crooked and with a deeply troubling past that included associations with Cosa Nostra, Silvio Berlusconi nevertheless became the longest-serving prime minister of the Italian Republic. Many Italians are reluctant to acknowledge it, but his influence on their society has been enduring. And, as Mr Stille foresaw, he pioneered a style of populist politics that others, including Donald Trump, would later embrace. As our review of “The Sack of Rome” noted, its publication in 2006 was ill-timed. Mr Berlusconi had just been voted out and, we opined, “at 69, his chances of returning are slim.” In fact, he was back two years later and today, at age 85, he still leads a party that could decide the nature of Italy’s next government. Our Italy and Vatican correspondent, based in Rome, is the author of his own book on Italy. The Italians. By John Hooper. Viking; 336 pages; $19.00. Allen Lane; £9.99 Corrupt, infuriating and beloved: it is not easy to explain Italy. A new take on Luigi Barzini’s 1964 classic of the same title. It featured in the bestseller lists of the Los Angeles Times and the Washington Post. The Financial Times said: “His book is both valuable and readable, a lucid and elegantly flowing description of a people.”■ ____________________ Do you have your own recommendations? Send them to summer@economist.com with the subject line “Italy” and your name, city and country. We will publish a selection of readers’ suggestions. More from The Economist reads:Our Paris bureau chief picks seven books to make sense of modern FranceWe pick five books on football and why it mattersOur food columnist selects the seven essential cookbooksOur obituaries editor picks the five best biographies ever written