Tennis fans have been triply blessed over the past 20 years in witnessing three of the greatest male players the game has ever seen. Roger Federer is loved the world over for the grace of his play, including his glorious one-handed backhand; Novak Djokovic is more grudgingly admired (given his wacky views on some issues) for his immense athleticism and intense competitiveness. Perhaps there has not been enough focus on the third member of the trio, Rafael Nadal. On June 5th, two days after turning 36, the Spaniard triumphed at the Roland Garros stadium in Paris to win the French Open. Remarkably, that was his 14th victory in Paris and his 22nd Grand Slam title overall, two more than each of his rivals. It is worth reflecting on those French victories; 14 years is longer than many tennis players’ entire careers. The closest equivalent was Margaret Court, who managed 11 Australian Open titles. When fully fit, Mr Nadal has been virtually unbeatable on clay. The surface is responsible for 63 of his 92 titles on the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) tour; at one point he managed 81 straight clay-court victories and his overall success rate on the surface is 91%. All his virtues were on display in the French Open final over the Norwegian Casper Ruud, when the Spaniard took the last 11 games in a row in a straight-sets victory. The left-handed Mr Nadal does not have an overwhelming serve. Whereas both Messrs Federer and Djokovic rank in the top 20 tennis professionals in terms of career aces, the Spaniard is only 57th. But on clay, where rallies tend to last longer, this is less of a disadvantage than on the grass of Wimbledon, where Mr Nadal has won only two titles. And Mr Nadal is excellent at returning serve, winning 42% of such points during his career, a ratio on a par with Mr Djokovic and slightly ahead of Mr Federer. What the left-handed Mr Nadal does have is an extremely powerful forehand, delivered with his strikingly muscular arms. He is able to generate a lot of topspin with this stroke, which on a clay surface often means his opponent has to return the ball from an uncomfortable height. This seems particularly true of Mr Federer. Mr Nadal has won 14 of his 16 matches against the Swiss champion on clay, but Mr Federer has won 14 of their 24 matches on other surfaces. Against Mr Djokovic, the record is not quite so lopsided: 20 victories for the Spaniard and eight for the Serb on clay, while Mr Djokovic has triumphed in 22 of their 31 battles on other surfaces. As well as a powerful forehand, Mr Nadal is excellent at scrambling across the court to keep himself in rallies and is adept at drop shots and angled volleys to finish off his opponents. His athleticism has enabled him to endure a number of injuries, including Mueller-Weiss syndrome, a degenerative disease which causes chronic foot pain. He managed to get through the French Open only by having anaesthetic injections to numb his foot and is about to undergo a new form of treatment in the hope of prolonging his career. But he has also suffered from wrist, elbow, back, knee and adductor-muscle ailments that have kept him out of many Grand Slam tournaments over the years. The rivalry between the big three players in world tennis has probably driven each to greater heights than they might have achieved separately, and they have each set standards for consistency and longevity that may never be equalled. Mr Nadal’s style of play may not have the sublime elegance of Mr Federer but in his words and actions, he has shown the grace of a true champion. Tennis fans should treasure his remaining years (or months) of action.■