When the news first dropped that Roe v Wade had been overturned, the crowd outside the Supreme Court was silent for about two seconds. Complete silence. Then everything shifted. An anti-abortion group started moving towards a podium in front of the building and gathering there. I rushed to the front and heard them say that the verdict had been overturned. They started celebrating: I could hear them yelling. A guy pulled out a bottle of champagne and started spraying it everywhere. I had to cover my camera to protect it from getting soaked. The women were crying tears of joy. I was photographing all this and in my head I was just thinking, “I can’t believe that this has happened.” Early on in the day, a woman had come up to me and told me in Spanish that she was raped as a teenager. She looked into my eyes and cried. She said, “What would I do now?” I started crying too. I didn’t really want to take a photo of her because she was sharing one of the most vulnerable moments of her life with me. And I didn’t know what to do. There were so many women there, young women, younger than me. Many were sharing experiences of being raped and sexually assaulted. It was really, really painful to hear. I don’t think any of them could see any way out of this. Many women came with their daughters. Some came with granddaughters and great-granddaughters. This trauma will endure for generations. I met one woman, Lisa, who was 47 and from Maryland, and her daughter Lucy, who is 14. Her relationship with her daughter reminded me of my relationship with my own mom. I was born in China, where traditionally women are expected to suppress their own feelings. Society doesn’t show a lot of respect for women and their choice, their dignity. Seeing a woman teach her daughter that she had a choice reminded me of the way my mom taught me that, too. She taught me that I have a choice in everything: in who I choose to be and what I choose to do; that I can always raise my voice. Lisa was marching around chanting “my body, my choice”. She had a whistle that she was using to lead people in the march. It was badass. She had written “MINE” on her chest. Protesters were shouting at each other the whole day. There were physical altercations too: people were taking away signs from the opposite side. I heard a lot of “Get the fuck out of here.” People were screaming that at each other or at the police, who had placed themselves between the two groups. Some people were trying to block me from photographing the other side. It was like they didn’t want that side of history to be seen. So many things were surreal, so many things that had to be documented. For instance, in the midst of all the tension and the clashes, a group of pro-lifers were listening to gospel music and praying. They were on the ground praying; many of them were crying, shedding real tears. Other women were dressed in “Handmaid’s Tale” outfits. They had tape on their mouths that said “abortion is a fundamental right”. The red they were wearing made them so visible: they were able to make their voices heard without saying anything at all. I saw coat hangers in the hands of other girls – one of them had tears streaming down her face. Many women were talking about how these decisions are made by old men at the top. That’s true of everywhere I have ever lived, or been: mainland China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Europe. That’s why the way my mom raised me was so important. You have to be strong as a photographer. And it’s a powerful job, you have to learn to navigate that power. I’m proud that I could cover this historic moment for women. I can visualise women’s frustrations in a way that’s true to them, because I’m a woman with the same dreams and frustrations as a lot of these women. I came to America believing that this country respects women far more than where I came from. Now they have overturned Roe v Wade, it feels like the country has gone back in time. The country is so divided now. Not just on abortion, but on many things. This was my dream, being here, learning here. But now I’ve started wondering if I really want to live in America. What if I have a child here, and it’s a girl? What if she isn’t respected here? My mother taught me that I have a choice. I don’t know if I could teach my own daughter that – not in this country. ■ Shuran Huang is a photojournalist based in Washington, DC. As told to Ann Hanna, who is an intern with 1843 magazine