When you arrive at Cinecittà, you pass through a gatehouse built in the rationalist style popular in Italy in the early 20th century. It seems to prepare you for a journey into the past. That is what the vast majority of visitors—around 100,000 a year—come for. Cinecittà, spread over more than 40 hectares on the outskirts of Rome, hosts the Italian Museum of Moving Images, which includes a permanent exhibition on the illustrious cinematic history of Cinecittà itself and another dedicated entirely to Federico Fellini, devised by his protégé, an Oscar-winning set designer, Dante Ferretti. Beyond the warehouse-like structures that house Cinecittà’s 19 stages, tourists can wander through its back lots and permanent sets. The most extensive is a fibreglass reproduction of an ancient Roman city, complete with an amphitheatre and triumphal arch. It is a reminder of the studio’s glory days in the late 1950s and early 1960s, when it was used to make epics including “Ben Hur” and “Cleopatra” (pictured) and earned the title of “Hollywood on the Tiber”. Until quite recently, says Cinecittà’s ceo, Nicola Maccanico, “this was a place where people came to experience the history of cinema and where, every so often, someone would come to make a film.” For the most part, the directors were either Italian or of Italian descent, such as Martin Scorsese, who made “Gangs of New York” at the studios, or Anthony Minghella, who chose Cinecittà for “The English Patient”. But all that may be about to change drastically. In absolute terms, Italy is poised to become the largest beneficiary of the European Union’s post-pandemic recovery fund: it is expected to receive or borrow at concessionary rates more than €200bn ($210bn). Of that, €260m has been earmarked for upgrading and vastly expanding Cinecittà. “The production of films, series and documentaries is undergoing a dizzying growth,” says the culture minister, Dario Franceschini. “We must make sure we’re ready.” The plan is to increase the number of stages on the existing site to 24 and develop a new, 31-hectare site nearby. The new plot, just half a kilometre away at its nearest point, will have an additional eight stages and 16 hectares of back lot. Whether you measure it by surface area or the number of stages, Cinecittà is about to expand by more than two-thirds. It will also acquire some state-of-the-art equipment already in use in studios in America and Britain—including a giant led screen that immerses actors in the fantasy they are enacting far more effectively than a traditional green screen. The question is whether this huge investment will pay off. Until a couple of months ago, the answer was patently yes. Cinecittà was fully booked, its fortunes having improved gradually over the past ten years, partly because of the advent of streaming. But the announcement in April of a drop in subscriptions to Netflix has cast a shadow over the entire film and tv industry. And now large parts of the world economy face inflation and maybe recession. Mr Maccanico agrees that “there could be a period of consolidation. But I think that the spaces that we are going to create at Cinecittà would be viable even in a period of slow growth.” Rome, he argues, holds immense attractions for film-makers, even in the face of growing competition from lower-cost studios in eastern Europe. First, a generous tax break: a 40% credit on eligible production expenses incurred in Italy, which can be up to 75% of the total production cost and a maximum of €20m a year. Then there are Cinecittà’s seasoned technicians. And finally, says Mr Maccanico, there is Rome itself. “If you say to a Charlize Theron we’re going to be shooting for six months in Sofia or six months in Rome…” Mr Maccanico leaves the sentence unfinished, but with an eloquent lift of the eyebrows that implies that, for stars used to a certain quality of life, the choice is obvious. ■