ON AUGUST 27TH, 20 priests and bishops will kneel before Pope Francis in St Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican to become cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church. This will be the eighth tranche picked by the pope, who is aged 85. Only the pontiff outranks cardinals, who are also known as the “princes of the church”. They will eventually choose his successor, almost certainly from among their ranks. The group that gathers to pick the next pope will be markedly different from the conclave that selected Francis in 2013, thanks to his choices. How have his cardinals changed the church? Canon law, the set of rules that governs Roman Catholicism, puts no limit on the number of cardinals a pope may choose. Pontiffs, assuming they are in the position for some time, usually choose most of the cardinals who pick their successor. Since 1975 only cardinals under the age of 80 have been allowed to vote on the next pope. Of the 20 new cardinals, 16 are of voting age; for the rest, the title is honorary. With these, Francis will have picked 82 of the 132 electors. The latest crop further concentrates his focus on the fringes of the church. East Timor, an island country of 1.3m people, more than 97% of whom are Catholic, is getting its first cardinal. So too are Paraguay and Mongolia (where there are only around 1,300 Catholics). Anthony Poola, the archbishop of Hyderabad in India, will become the first Dalit cardinal. Dalits, long considered India’s “untouchables” under the caste system, make up the vast majority of the country’s Catholics but are underrepresented among its bishops. These choices, and the other selections that Francis has made over the past nine years, have tilted the balance of power in the church away from Europe. The share of European cardinal electors has fallen from 52% to 40%. But neither figure reflects the geographical spread of Catholics today: more than a third are in Latin America; Africa is the engine of growth; and in Europe and America the church is faltering. Despite the changes Francis has made many regions are still badly underrepresented (see chart). Francis is also mindful of church politics. He presides over a church finely balanced between reformers and conservatives; several of his latest choices signal his sympathy for liberals. Robert McElroy, the bishop of San Diego, is a liberal in a country whose church leaders are mainly conservatives. Many American bishops want to systematically deny communion to politicians who support policies that go against church teaching (such as abortion). But Bishop McElroy argues that the sacrament should not be politicised. The pope has also chosen Arthur Roche, the head of the Vatican department in charge of liturgy. He oversaw reforms that limited the use of the traditional Latin mass, a move forcefully opposed by conservatives. When Pope Benedict retired in 2013, he was the first pontiff to do so in almost 600 years. Francis has said that he may do the same. He has used a wheelchair or walker in recent months because of knee pain, and described a trip to Canada in July as a “test”. He put his stamp on the church by championing the poor, refugees and the environment. The best way to preserve that legacy will be through his successor. The new cardinals provide a further clue as to what sort of man the next pope may be. ■ More from The Economist explains:How is the Supreme Court changing the law of religious liberty in America?Why did the Russian and Ukrainian Orthodox churches split?How has the Catholic church reckoned with sexual-abuse claims?