Some people were missing from this year’s International AIDS Conference. Held in Montreal in Canada this week, the gathering brings together experts, activists and patients from all over the world, rich and poor alike. It is this mix that has helped bear down on a disease that has killed about 40m people, 650,000 of them in 2021. However, Canada denied visas to some delegates from poor countries, seemingly because it worried that they might fail to go home. Exactly how many were kept out is not yet clear and, thanks to work by a previous AIDS conference in 2020, at the height of the covid-19 pandemic, they at least had a chance to attend virtually. Yet lockdown showed how much of a conference’s value is to be found in corridors, bars and chance encounters rather than formal sessions. Canada’s warped sense of priorities is typical of the struggle, even now, to get people to take HIV seriously. Rich-country governments, Canada’s included, give out non-trivial amounts of cash every year to assist less fortunate places with the purchase and distribution of the antiretroviral drugs that keep symptoms at bay for those infected. However, the amount of cash has been sliding—and the slide began before covid was around to blame. Possibly as a consequence (although in this case covid was probably a confounding variable) the year-on-year fall in infections in 2021, 3.6%, was the smallest since 2016. People are often squeamish about diseases, but they are more squeamish about HIV/AIDS than most. Its principal route of transmission is sexual, a fact that immediately gets puritan antennae twitching. A subordinate route is from injecting drugs, in the eyes of the censorious another strike against those afflicted. And of those at risk from sexual transmission, sex workers, their clients, gay and bisexual men, and transgender women are top of the list. Even in sub-Saharan Africa, the part of the world where HIV infection is most widespread and penetrates the general population most heavily, more than half of those newly infected last year were either in one of these risk groups or were sexual partners of someone in one of them. In many places it is hard to persuade politicians and voters that dealing with this should be a priority. All of this matters. So far, the world has done a creditable job distributing symptom-suppressing antiretroviral drugs to those in need of them. Almost 29m, around three-quarters of that number, are on treatment. Inevitably though, the first three-quarters is the easiest. Plugging the remaining gap will get progressively harder, and will also involve encouraging social and political changes to attitudes to things like homosexuality, prostitution and drug use that many countries will find hard to accept. Every year, meanwhile, there are 1.5m new infections. Far from sliding, the amount spent on combating HIV needs to go up, from $21bn last year to $29bn in 2025, according to an estimate published last year. In the grand scheme of things, that is not a huge ask. But if even a country as socially conscious as Canada cannot quite bring itself to admit some of those most affected, in order that they might attend the leading forum dealing with HIV, there is reason to worry. ■