It was not by design that Edinburgh came to be known as “Festival City”. During the second world war Sir Rudolf Bing, the general manager of Glyndebourne’s opera festival, conceived of an international arts festival to be held in Britain once the fighting was over. He considered Bath, Cambridge, Canterbury, Chester and Oxford before Henry Harvey Wood, the head of the British Council’s Scottish branch, suggested Edinburgh. With its looming castle, Scotland’s capital reminded Bing, an Austrian refugee, of Salzburg, where Max Reinhardt, a theatre director, had launched a festival in 1920. The inaugural Edinburgh International Festival opened on August 24th 1947. The programme included an array of performing arts—opera, chamber music, Scottish song, ballet and drama—but no Scottish theatre. This stirred up controversy; in the run-up to the festival, organisers were accused of cultural elitism and of failing to acknowledge Scottish drama. When a member of Glasgow Unity Theatre asked for her company’s plays to be included, Bing claimed that “no Scottish theatre is up to standard.” Eight drama troupes, six of whom were Scottish, turned up independently and uninvited to stage their own shows in protest against the snub. These anarchic “fringe” performances captivated audiences and were cheaper to watch. The main event thus unwittingly gave birth to another: the Edinburgh Festival Fringe (though it was not formalised until the mid-1950s, notes Angela Bartie in “The Edinburgh Festivals: Culture and Society in Post-War Britain”.) The relationship between the Fringe and its official cousin remained fractious for nearly two decades. Patrick Brooks, treasurer of the Festival Fringe Society, likened the relationship to a “state of cold war” in 1965. The Fringe was not acknowledged in the Edinburgh Festival’s official programme until 1969. Yet only five years later, in 1974, the Fringe sold more tickets than the main festival. Today the riotous Edinburgh Fringe is well established as the main draw. In 2019, the last edition before the pandemic, 323 venues provided a stage for over 30,000 performers. More than 3m people turned up to watch. The Fringe is the largest arts festival in the world—and this year celebrates its 75th anniversary. It was the revue shows, theatrical skits that mix comedy with song, that cemented the Fringe’s place in Britain’s cultural consciousness. Their success encouraged the main festival to feature less snooty and more popular performances, including “Beyond The Fringe” in 1960, a peerless piece of satire starring Alan Bennett, Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore. In the Sixties the festival became associated with daring, radical work that often pushed the boundaries of moral sensibilities and riffed on the prevailing countercultural mood. Some conservative newspapers commented in horror about “filth on the Fringe”; shows that challenged social mores saw their sales soar. The term “fringe” took on a broader significance beyond Edinburgh, referring to performance or theatre that revolved around experimental work or new writing. The fast-growing spectacle became a platform for professional performers as well as amateur and student groups. Since the 1990s the Fringe has gained a particular reputation for stand-up comedy; Nish Kumar, Josie Long and Stewart Lee are among the comedians regaling crowds this year. Though such names require bigger venues, these spaces manage to retain an ebullient, homespun feel: the Pleasance fashions a 750-seater auditorium from a sports hall, for instance. The vast majority of performances at the Fringe unfold in pop-up or converted spaces—an attic, cellar or university room—not dissimilar to the makeshift spaces that hosted the first shows back in 1947. The Fringe has long prided itself on the fact that it welcomes “anyone with a story to tell and a venue willing to host them”. It can be a catalyst for stardom, from Tom Stoppard with “Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead” in 1966 to “Fleabag”, Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s critically-acclaimed comedy, first performed at the Fringe in 2013. The number of bookers, producers and agents there means that “an energy can build around a show that no one’s ever heard of before”, explains Anthony Alderson, artistic director of the Pleasance Theatre Trust. A trade-off often comes with size and success, however. Over the years the rebellious spirit that pervaded the early years of Fringe has been somewhat curtailed, as professional demands trump spontaneity. The risk-taking associated with the Fringe is as much financial now as it is creative. Groups must fork out on registration, marketing and accommodation, as well as on guarantees for venues. Few see solid returns. The Fringe Society offers artists six example budgets: five entail losing money. “Artists from marginalised or underprivileged backgrounds struggle to have their work celebrated” because of structural problems, says Stephen Greer of the University of Glasgow. There are signs of change. Some institutions such as Pleasance now offer funding opportunities to artists. This year the production company founded by Ameena Hamid, a young British theatre producer, is providing pay-what-you-can accommodation to emerging thespians and producers. Fringe of Colour, an organisation founded in 2018, runs a database of shows where at least half of performers are black or people of colour, and provides ethnic minorities with free tickets for these productions. An institution as large as the Fringe cannot expect to retain its edge and increasingly performers are seeking opportunities beyond it. A fringe has been developing to the Fringe. The Free Fringe charges neither performers nor audiences and instead conducts a whip-round at the end of each show. Forest Fringe offers a home for experimental work that does not suit the Edinburgh Fringe’s punishing timings and commercialisation. (It is now standard for smaller acts to have only 15 minutes on either side of their show to set up and clear and for venues to programme 14-hour days.) Tellingly, Forest Fringe has moved away from Scotland’s capital, working instead elsewhere in Britain and around the world. The Fringe will continue to be a hive of creation and a magnet for crowds looking to be entertained. But what was once an irreverent upstart is now part of the establishment. ■ “The Edinburgh Festival Fringe” runs until August 29th