The Prince Regent didn’t much enjoy his regency. “Playing at King”, as he called his time standing in for his father, the “mad” George III, was less fun than it sounded, though the prince bravely made the most of it. He got drunk, took laudanum and squandered his money on matronly mistresses, diamond-buttoned breeches and enormous breakfasts. He eventually became so fat that by 1822, by which time he had been crowned George IV, he looked, in the words of one portraitist, “like a great sausage stuffed into the covering”. Monarchies don’t like regencies. Not without reason. They spoil the royal myth, for one thing. If it is tough persuading people that you are God’s chosen representative on Earth, it is tougher yet to persuade them that you are just standing in for God’s choice, for a bit, while the other one is indisposed. And regencies rarely go well. Among other things England’s regents and royal stand-ins have managed to lose their nation vast amounts of wealth, the king they were supposed to be looking after and, on one notably careless occasion, dominion in France. England’s regencies, says Tracy Borman, author of “Crown & Sceptre”, have “pretty much always [been] a disaster”. And yet the role of royal stopgap remains essential, even if kings and queens no longer swashbuckle as they used to. Once regencies happened principally because the monarch was too young; today it is likely to be because they are too old. The 1937 Regency Act states that a regency can happen if it is decided that the monarch “is by reason of infirmity of mind or body incapable for the time being of performing the royal functions”. The current queen, while manifestly not incapable, is clearly less capable than she was. A list of her royal engagements shows that they have been falling in a slow and gentle slope—from an admittedly high base—for some time: 831 in 2011; 295 in 2019; 184 in 2021, of which over half were done by phone or video link. In 2015 she stopped travelling abroad; in the past year she has missed the Remembrance Day service, a service for her own jubilee and, on July 28th, the opening of the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham. At the state opening of Parliament in May, her crown went on a cushion in her place. And when the queen does not do something Prince Charles will often, as with the state opening and the start of the Commonwealth Games, do it in her stead. This does not mean that we are living in a regency, says Craig Prescott, a specialist in constitutional law at Bangor University. “Legally we are…quite far from that” because “behind the scenes, on a day-to-day constitutional basis, the queen is continuing to be very much in charge.” The constitutional bit matters. A modern monarch might have few powers—Walter Bagehot, a 19th-century editor of The Economist, pointed out that the queen “must sign her own death-warrant” if Parliament presented it to her—but they do have some. Many of these powers, or “royal prerogatives”, in the jargon, barely matter. The nation is unlikely to grind to a halt if the queen doesn’t exercise her right to claim unmarked swans, sturgeons or, as one 1322 act has it, every whale fished up “in the sea or elsewhere within the Realm”. But the nation would very much mind if the queen failed to appoint a prime minister, to dissolve Parliament or to give royal assent to legislation. And it very much did notice when her crown went to Parliament in her stead. The modern monarch might be only a cog in the machinery of government, but for the machine to work that cog must still turn. When George III’s “ulcer’d mind” left him alternatively setting fire to his page’s wigs and weeping in a straitjacket in his rooms, Parliament was paralysed. The flip side of Bagehot’s death-warrant observation is not merely that the queen would have to sign the warrant, but that Parliament couldn’t execute her until she did so. The queen is still performing most of her essential constitutional functions. What she is doing much less of are the other duties: the meetings and greetings, the flesh-pressing, the hand-waving. This is not, says Mr Prescott, trivial. These “in the public mind [are] probably more important than the slightly arcane constitutional functions that take place pretty much behind the scenes”. As indeed few know better than the queen herself. One of the reasons she has always worn bright colours is so that people could spot her: “I have to be seen to be believed.” Now that she is being seen far less, says Mr Prescott, then “in public it looks like we have a shadow regency.” In a shadow regency attention is naturally paid more closely to the shadow regent. Charles does not always come out of this well. The man who is titled “His Royal Highness, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Chester, Earl of Carrick, Earl of Merioneth, Baron of Renfrew, Baron Greenwich, Lord of the Isles and Great Steward of Scotland” has been given other, less flattering, titles by his critics. He has been called a “twerp”, “a prat”, a meddler and a whinger—the “Prince of Wails”. The criticism of Charles is sometimes cruel. It can overlook his good qualities: his hard work, for one, and his environmentalism, which has gone from seeming peculiar to prescient. But it is not baseless. He has done breathtakingly silly things—accepting money in a suitcase from a Qatari politician being the most recent (there is no suggestion of wrongdoing by either party)—that undermine not merely his authority but that of the whole Firm. And while she lives, it is hard for him to compete with the queen. In a famous broadcast when she was 21, she announced in her high, starched voice that: “I declare before you all that my whole life whether it be long or short shall be devoted to your service.” The life, it turned out, has been very long; the service, relentless. Few would begrudge her more rest. They may feel more ambivalent about her stand-in. ■