On August 4th a Russian court sentenced Brittney Griner, an American basketball player, to nine years in prison. Ms Griner was arrested at a Moscow airport in February after officials found cannabis oil in her luggage. The two-time Olympic gold medallist had pleaded guilty to bringing the drug into the country, and she told the court she had made an “honest mistake”. America maintains she has been wrongfully detained. She appears to be a pawn in the rivalry between the two countries. But a prisoner swap may be in the offing. One possible candidate for such an exchange appears to be Viktor Bout, a Russian arms dealer who was convicted in America in 2011. The White House also wants to secure the release of Paul Whelan, a former marine who was arrested in Russia for espionage in 2018. How and why do such exchanges come about? There is no strict doctrine on swapping the incarcerated. Countries decide on a case-by-case basis whether to exchange or release prisoners. Often a high-profile incident or a detainee’s possession of sensitive information pushes a government to try to get its citizens back. The cold war presented many of the most famous and dramatic examples. In 1962 Francis Gary Powers, an American pilot of a U-2 spy plane shot down over the Soviet Union, was exchanged for a Soviet spy, Rudolf Abel, on the Glienicke Bridge, which connected West Berlin to East Germany. Democracies often face greater public pressure to retrieve their citizens, particularly when they are unjustly convicted. Authoritarian regimes can use exchanges as a propaganda coup or to achieve political ends without compunction. The case of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British-Iranian charity worker who was arrested in Iran in 2016 on false espionage charges and imprisoned for six years, captured the British imagination. Her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, campaigned tirelessly for her release, going on several hunger strikes. Ms Zaghari-Ratcliffe and another prisoner, Anoosheh Ashoori, were eventually released in March 2022. In exchange the British government agreed to hand over not another prisoner but a long-standing debt of some £400m to Iran, a sore point for Iranian leaders for some 40 years. Democratic governments may also struggle to justify a swap for a prisoner who has committed serious crimes. That might be a stumbling-block in the proposed exchange of Ms Griner and Mr Bout—the arms dealer did not earn the nickname “Merchant of Death” for nothing. Governments of all stripes must ask themselves what they’re willing to offer to secure a release. Sometimes the cost might be a symbolic political gesture. In 2010 America’s former president Jimmy Carter travelled to North Korea to retrieve Aijalon Gomes, a teacher sentenced to eight years’ labour for entering the country without the proper permission. Mr Carter’s visit came at a time of intense discussion over North Korea’s nuclear status, after the hermit state failed to meet commitments over denuclearisation. Or the price of freedom may be financial, as in the case of Ms Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Mr Ashoori. Governments must also consider whether paying for prisoners risks encouraging unscrupulous governments to take more hostages. In July 2022 President Joe Biden signed an executive order to bolster the government’s methods to bring wrongfully detained nationals home without turning them into bargaining chips. The order included new powers to impose visa bans and sanctions on people who carry out the detentions. Considering the range of American sanctions already in place on Russia, these measures are unlikely to help Ms Griner. She will have to hope that the American and Russian governments are willing to strike a deal despite the rift in their relations over the war in Ukraine. She should not give up hope. On August 5th Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said that his country was open to talks with America about a prisoner swap. But the full price of Ms Griner’s freedom remains uncertain. ■ More from The Economist explains:Why is the American right obsessed with Viktor Orban?How is the James Webb Space Telescope changing astronomy?How crowdfunding is shaping the war in Ukraine