For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter. LIKE MANY countries, Japan faces few good options when it comes to energy supplies. Its government has been more reluctant to cut ties with Russia than counterparts in Europe. Before the war in Ukraine, Russia supplied 11% of Japan’s coal imports, 9% of its natural gas imports and 4% of its oil imports, according to S&P Global, a financial-information firm. Under pressure to diversify supplies, Japan is turning to an old friend. On August 24th Kishida Fumio, the prime minister, made a renewed commitment to nuclear energy. He wants idled power plants to be restarted and next-generation reactors built. His government promises to deliver concrete plans by the year’s end. This signals a big shift. Nuclear power once supplied 30% of Japan’s electricity. But an earthquake and tsunami in 2011 triggered a meltdown at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear plant. After that, all 54 of Japan’s reactors were shut. Today it has 33 reactors, but only 17 have passed new safety inspections by the nuclear watchdog. Of these, just ten have been restarted. Changing public opinion explains the government’s pivot back to nuclear, at least in part. In the months after the Fukushima disaster, support for nuclear power plummeted. A poll conducted in 2011 by Kyodo, a news agency, found that 70% of Japanese favoured doing away with nuclear power. A recent poll by Nikkei, a financial-news service, found that a similar share now favour it, up from 44% in 2021. Rising energy costs help to explain the shift. Tight supply and surging oil and gas prices have led to higher electricity bills for households in Japan, and across the world. The government’s goal is for nuclear power to make up 20% of the energy mix by 2030. There is some way to go: it accounted for just 4% of electricity generation in 2020 and 6% last year. Officials want nine reactors up and running by the winter, which would generate 10% of Japan’s electricity demand. Even with this extra capacity, Japanese households could face an energy crunch this winter. It took more than ten years for the public to change its mind on nuclear energy. It may be another decade before the industry is back on its feet. ■