IN 1943 BASEBALL underwent a short-lived revolution. To keep the sport alive and lucrative while many male players were abroad fighting in the second world war, executives dreamed up the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League (AAGPL). Attendance peaked in 1948, when nearly 1m fans attended games. The league lasted only until 1954, and no equivalent exists today. But the AAGPL has not been forgotten, at least by Hollywood. In 1992 “A League of Their Own” premiered in cinemas and introduced new generations to the fact that America had run a professional women’s baseball league for 11 years. (In fact, a new women’s team was formed two years after the film’s release: the Colorado Silver Bullets played against amateur men’s teams, but folded in 1998.) On August 12th a drama series of the same name will be released on Prime Video, reimagining the original film but with a more diverse cast and different storylines. It is in its exploration of players’ sexuality and the role of black players that the new version makes its mark. The 1992 film belongs in the pantheon of America’s best baseball movies. An all-star cast—including Geena Davis, Madonna and Rosie O’Donnell—become members of the Peaches, where they are ostensibly coached by Jimmy Dugan (Tom Hanks), a sexist boozehound who is bitter about squandering his final playing years drinking. While marching towards the World Series, the Peaches endure misogynistic heckling from the bleachers, impractical uniforms (one team’s motto becomes “Dirt in the skirt”) and charm lessons—lest they encourage the fear that baseball would contribute to the “masculinisation of women”. That fear was not fiction. Gender norms changed rapidly in the mid-20th century, as women entered the workforce en masse during the war. Professional baseball for “girls” was just one more clang of the death knell for the belief that men and women belonged in separate spheres. Spring training for the actual league included a kind of beauty school to make the players appear as feminine as possible. A ridiculous but worthy sacrifice, the film suggests, in order to play baseball. Where the film of 30 years ago fell short was in its silence about race. Like the men’s league, the AAGPL was unofficially segregated. But the only nod to this constraint came near the end of the movie, when a black woman tosses a ball to the Peaches and shares a knowing look with the team’s catcher (Ms Davis). The new series aims to remedy that oversight. But it, too, disappoints. One of the show’s main characters is Maxine, or Max (Chanté Adams), a black pitcher who is turned away from the AAGPL on account of her race. Yet she pursues baseball by other means: pitching against a brick wall, attempting to join a male factory team and, finally, being recruited by a travelling team of black players. But Max’s storyline is entirely separate from the Peaches’ pursuit of the World Series, which remains the central thrust. Some of that is a matter of history: the series would become complete fiction if Max were to join the Peaches. But the duelling plots remain, as it were, segregated. The result is disjointed, and makes the viewer wish for a show devoted entirely to Max and her travails. The stories overlap only in their location (Rockford, Illinois), focus on baseball and portrayal of queer characters. That said, the last of these is no small detail. Most of the main characters pursue romantic relationships with other women. That makes the series remarkable, despite its shortcomings. The series shines, too, in its regular acknowledgment of the Negro Leagues, a constellation of black teams whose golden age lasted from the 1920s until the late 1940s, when Major League Baseball began to integrate. Max mentions Satchel Paige, a Negro Leagues superstar whom many baseball greats considered the best pitcher of all time. She has a team photo of the Homestead Grays, a Negro Leagues team, on her bedroom wall. In one scene, a black team plays “shadow ball”, a pre-game ritual in the Negro Leagues in which the athletes pantomime spectacular plays without a ball. These welcome tributes to a crucial, and perennially overlooked, part of baseball history suggest the show has room to grow. Three women joined the male Negro Leagues in the 1950s, once Major League Baseball began to poach their top players. When Hank Aaron ditched the Indianapolis Clowns for the Milwaukee Braves in 1953, the team signed Toni Stone. Mamie Johnson and Connie Morgan followed soon after. Perhaps a second season might find Max in a different league of her own.■