Just around the headland from the Needles, a set of razor-sharp sea cliffs on the Isle of Wight, off England’s southern coast, lies a curious historical dead end. A series of concrete bunkers built into a hillside are all that remain of a cold-war rocket-testing facility. Built in the 1950s, they were designed to help Britain keep pace with America and the Soviet Union in the race to build rockets and ballistic missiles. In the end Britain launched just a single satellite on its domestically produced Black Arrow rocket, in 1971, before scrapping the programme on cost grounds. It remains the only country to have developed and then abandoned a domestic space-launch capability. Half a century later, space is back on the agenda. In 2020 the British government and Bharti Global, an Indian firm, spent around $500m each on stakes in OneWeb, a satellite operator driven into bankruptcy by covid-19. OneWeb is in the midst of building a constellation of hundreds of low-flying satellites, designed to beam internet access to anywhere on Earth; on July 26th it announced a merger with Eutelsat, a European operator of geostationary satellites whose shareholders include the French government. In the next few months Virgin Orbit, a space-launch firm, intends to loft a mix of commercial and military satellites into orbit from the newly established Spaceport Cornwall, based at Newquay airport, 150 miles west of the Isle of Wight. The government, which has become notably keener on the once-unfashionable idea of industrial policy, hopes the launch will help propel Britain’s space industry to great heights. Much of the growth, ministers hope, will come from private-sector activity. Britain’s space industry was already valued at £16.4bn ($20.1bn) in 2021. Around half of it is accounted for by firms such as Sky that broadcast television by satellite. But it also contains a slew of high-tech firms that develop sensors and satellites; a few are even trying to build rockets. Over the past 20 years the cost of both launches and satellites have come down, reducing barriers to entry and fuelling demand. A report from BryceTech, a space-consultancy firm, put the size of the global market at £270bn in 2019, and forecast it might hit £490bn by 2030. For now at least, government remains a big customer. Britain’s armed forces plan to spend £5bn over ten years on a replacement for the Skynet military-communications system, and another £1.4bn on new capabilities, the bulk of which will go on a series of spy satellites. Brexit has frozen Britain out of the European Space Agency’s Galileo project, which aims to build an alternative to America’s gps satellites; ministers have talked of modifying OneWeb’s satellites to provide an alternative. British participation in Copernicus, a European civilian Earth-observation programme, is also under threat. The most eye-catching of the government’s ambitions is for Britain to become a leader in the launch of small satellites. Diminutive, standardised satellites, produced with off-the-shelf parts and increasingly mass-produced, are likely to dominate the future of the industry. One pioneer of this trend is a British firm, Surrey Satellite Technologies. At the same time, innovation means orbit can be reached more cheaply than before. Virgin Orbit’s rocket will be carried 10,000 metres into the air by a special aircraft before lighting its engines for the final ascent to orbit. Besides Cornwall, Britain has six more potential spaceports in various stages of development (see map). The country’s comparatively high latitude makes it slightly easier to reach the special polar or sun-synchronous orbits favoured by military-reconnaissance satellites and civilian Earth-observation ones. Although its stake in OneWeb will be diluted as part of the Eutelsat deal, the government will retain a golden share that, among other things, makes Britain the “preferred” location for its future launches. The firm needs big rockets to send batches of satellites into orbit, however; it has already earmarked California and India for its next scheduled launches. Launches look glamorous, warns Simon Potter of BryceTech, but generate comparatively little value. BryceTech puts the size of the global launch market at perhaps $7bn a year. The government hopes that a successful launch facility might serve to anchor a bigger cluster, but the competition is fierce. The “New Space” industry of which Britain wants a slice has developed mostly in America. It was midwifed in part by nasa, the world’s biggest and best-funded space agency, and it has access to both technological expertise and a venture-capital industry used to funding risky ideas. OneWeb, for example, is up against SpaceX, an American firm founded by Elon Musk that builds the cheapest rockets in the business and also operates Starlink, its own, much bigger constellation of low-Earth-orbit internet satellites. (Investors are wary: Eutelsat’s shares fell by more than one-third in the two days after news of its planned deal with OneWeb emerged.) When Britain last had such big ambitions in space, they soon fell to Earth. Bringing them to fruition this time round will be no easier. ■