IT IS NOT as though the year had been kind to Pakistan. For months the country has been suffering from double-digit inflation, driven by soaring food and fuel prices. Its currency has plunged as foreign reserves have dwindled. The ousting of Imran Khan in April failed to restore longed-for political stability; followers of the former prime minister took to the streets to hound his successor. Now a terrible natural disaster is increasing the pain. Over the past two months the heaviest rainfall on record has inundated vast swathes of Pakistan, devastating cities and farmland. Over 1,100 people have been killed, and early estimates put the costs at $10bn. One-third of the country is underwater; the government has declared 72 out of 160 districts to be disaster zones. The last few days have seen more than 100 deaths and the destruction of thousands of houses, as flash floods in northern Pakistan washed away homes and hotels built on riverbanks. The volume of rainfall is staggering. Some 700mm (28 inches) have been dumped on the south-eastern province of Sindh, nearly six times the 30-year annual average. Balochistan, a vast, arid province normally untouched by the monsoon, has received five times its annual average. The resultant flooding already appears to be the worst in decades. Massive floods in 2010 cost an estimated $10bn, mostly in rural areas. This time cities are also badly afflicted. Transport links in and around Quetta, the capital of Balochistan, have been badly disrupted. The potholed roads of Karachi, a megacity in the south, are awash. Initial estimates suggest 1m homes will have to be rebuilt. City-dwellers tend to be less reluctant to leave their flooded homes than people living on the land. That means the death toll this year may end up lower than the 2,000 people who died during the 2010 floods. Yet the economic fallout from the floods—which are estimated to have affected one in seven Pakistanis—or 33m people, will be immense. Inflation, which touched 25% in July, will rise further as food crops are wiped out. The hit to rural wealth and incomes will probably spread to the industrial sector. Carmakers have already predicted a collapse in sales. Waterlogging could delay the start of the next wheat season, causing prolonged shortages. The cotton crop, the country’s biggest export, has been devastated. On Monday the imf approved the release of $1.1bn to Pakistan, signalling the resumption of a bail-out programme and access to further lines of credit. The cash is urgently needed. Earlier in August Pakistan’s foreign-exchange reserves fell to $8bn, enough for just one month of imports. Yet abiding by the imf’s conditions while providing an effective flood response and negotiating the country’s fractious politics will be a fiendish task for the prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif. The imf deal is predicated on “steadfast implementation” of a federal budget that prioritises cutting spending and borrowing. The fund has acknowledged that the flooding will mean some fiscal slippage. Yet it may not prove sufficiently flexible for Mr Sharif. His government has already made itself unpopular by raising electricity and fuel prices at the imf’s behest. Last week—via video link from Qatar—Mr Sharif was forced to rescind a further increase in electricity prices after people took to the streets. With an election due by October 2023, the prime minister will be under pressure to further loosen the purse strings to provide flood relief. Members of his own party have already denounced the imf deal; its leader (and Mr Sharif’s elder brother), Nawaz Sharif, is reportedly unhappy with it. Mr Khan will also no doubt pile in. Fuel subsidies that he imposed in office blew up the imf programme in February. There is one small hope. In 2019 Pakistan imposed a moratorium on trade with India when Narendra Modi, its prime minister, scrapped the autonomous status of the Indian-administered portion of Kashmir. Yet Mr Sharif’s government has suggested opening up to imports of vegetables from across the border to help stabilise prices in Pakistan. In response Mr Modi tweeted his “heartfelt condolences to…all those affected by this natural calamity” and his “hope for an early restoration of normalcy”.■