Jake Freestone is having a stressful summer. He manages Overbury Enterprises, a 1,565-hectare (3,870-acre) estate on the border between Worcestershire and Gloucestershire, in the west of England. The lack of rainfall this summer has dented his oilseed-rape harvest; there is not enough moisture in the ground to plant crops for next year. His 850 ewes and 1,400 lambs are running out of grass. His winter-forage stock is not what it should be because the usual 60-odd hectares of stubble turnips cannot be planted.On August 12th officials declared large areas of England to be in drought. Last month was the driest July since 1935, with temperatures exceeding 40°C for the first time. River flows are lower than in previous hot summers. Reservoirs are depleting fast; by June stocks in some places were already 20% below average. Soil moisture in most regions is at its lowest since at least 2013.Many farmers are struggling. Some have lost entire plantings of peas, salad heads, broad beans and spinach. Livestock are going hungry. Following the declaration of drought in parts of England, restrictions may be placed on water usage, which could spell disaster. Even if the heavens open, climate change threatens to make the problem of insufficient rainfall a regular occurrence. Some farmers are adopting new methods to offset the effects of drier weather; above all they want to be sure that they have access to water when they need it. Most farmers use piped mains water; a sizeable minority takes water from rivers and boreholes. Abstracting water from rivers requires special licences from the Environment Agency, a government body, which can be rescinded during droughts. Storing water in reservoirs mitigates the risk of that happening. In 2016 a survey found that 2% of farm holdings could draw from private reservoirs; since then more have been built.But personal reservoirs are not cheap—they can cost well over £1m ($1.2m), although government grants can soften the blow. Obtaining planning permission is a faff. They can run dry, too: Mr Freestone’s farm reservoir is running dangerously low. So, as well as tax breaks to incentivise more such projects, the National Farmers’ Union (NFU), a trade body, is also demanding massive investment to update Britain’s creaking water infrastructure.No major public reservoirs have been built in the past 30 years; some 20% of water is lost to leaky pipes. The NFU wants the government to build new pipelines to better redistribute water from the wettest regions of the country to the driest, and to give farmers priority access to water during times of scarcity. “If it was a choice between HS2 [a high-speed railway] and new water infrastructure, I know which I want,” says a farmer.Anglian Water, a utility, is planning a 50,000-megalitre multi-sector reservoir (MSR) in Lincolnshire. MSRs supply water to businesses, farms and consumers, and are common in arid nations. Tim Hess, of Cranfield University, reckons MSRs may be a way to get new reservoirs built where one group of users would not have justified the investment. The problem, he says, is that MSRs work best when wildlife, farmers and the public need water at different times; in this case they will all need extra water at the same time. And the project may yet be rejected: Ofwat, the water regulator, thinks that as a matter of principle the public should not subsidise other users’ access to the reservoir.In the meantime some are changing the way they farm in order to improve resilience to hot weather. Ben Raskin, head of horticulture at the Soil Association, a charity, says that when arable farms rip out trees and hedges to maximise profits, they take away natural sources of protection against soil erosion. Planting trees can build soil quality and structure because rain can infiltrate deeper and the ground can hold on to more water, which helps keep crops irrigated during droughts.Lucerne (also known as alfalfa), a deep-rooted crop used for livestock grazing in New Zealand and South Africa, is finding a fanbase in eastern England, as it can reach water deposits buried in the soil. Cover crops are also becoming popular. These are not planted for harvesting, but to reverse soil erosion and increase water infiltration. Andy Dibben, a farmer in Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, uses clovers, sainfoin and vetch. Mr Freestone prefers to use vetch, oats with buckwheat, fodder radish, phacelia and berseem clover; but he is unable to plant cover crops this year because of the dry ground. More radical options exist. Chris Jones, a farmer in Cornwall, has moved beavers onto his land. Farmers have long disliked beavers, as their dams can disrupt drainage. But Mr Jones thinks they help protect against drought, by building dams to store water. He says beavers have helped him stave off the worst effects of the lack of rain. They are much cheaper than reservoirs: catching, housing, vetting and transporting the creatures from colonies in Devon and Wales cost around £14,000. But it will take time for attitudes to shift. Mr Jones admits that the idea of beavers may cause the NFU’s leadership to have a “heart attack”.■