For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter “THIS FALL, Roe is on the ballot,” said President Joe Biden on June 24th, hours after America’s Supreme Court announced its decision to overturn Roe v Wade—in effect ending the constitutional right to abortion. Almost complete bans were automatically triggered in 11 states; severe restrictions came into force in several others. The Economist’s analysis of new voter registrations in 29 states suggests that many Americans have taken heed of the president’s call to action. In the two weeks after the decision the number of people registering to vote increased by 10%, with the number of new women voters far exceeding the number of men. In the first four months of this year the share of women registering to vote hovered just below 50%. But this trend reversed after the Supreme Court’s draft decision in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organisation, that the United States constitution did not confer a right to abortion (in effect, overturning Roe), was leaked in early May. The percentage of women among those registering began to creep up, eventually peaking at 55.2% on June 30th, six days after the final decision. Comparing the two weeks before the leaked ruling with the two weeks after the judgement, the share of women electors increased in all but two of the 30 states in our analysis: Oregon and Montana. This trend was most pronounced in key battleground states for November’s midterm elections, and where the fight over abortion rights has been fiercest. Take Kansas. Abortion has been hotly debated in the state. And it will host a crucial vote in the midterms when Sharice Davids tries to hang on to Kansas’s only Democrat-held House district. The state has witnessed the greatest increase in women registering to vote, with their share growing by 19 percentage points between the fortnight before the leak and the fortnight after the final ruling. Other states facing both competitive races and debates over abortion include Arizona and Michigan, where the share of women registrants increased by ten and seven points respectively. This may well help the Democrats come November. Women voters tend to be more left-leaning than men. Eighteen states have reported the political affiliations of the new names on their electoral rolls, and all but two (Alaska and Oregon) showed a boost for Democrats. Across all states where data was available, the share of Democrats grew by around 4 percentage points. In Pennsylvania, where the races for governor, senator and two house seats are likely to be tight, almost 5,000 more Democrats registered than Republicans in the two weeks following the decision. In 2020, Biden won in the state by a margin of just 80,500 votes. The Republican Party has wanted to overturn the right to abortion for decades. It may have some regrets come November. ■