IN A STRIKING development in a deeply conservative part of America, voters in Kansas have rejected a ballot initiative that would have scrapped the right to abortion in their state constitution. The referendum on August 2nd was the first opportunity since the federal Supreme Court overruled Roe v Wade in June for voters to decide on the fate of reproductive rights at the state level. And decide they did: though polls had pointed to a narrow win for the anti-abortion side, nearly two-thirds of voters opted to keep the constitution—and abortion rights—intact. The question Kansans considered was inspired by a decision of the state supreme court in 2019. In Hodes & Nauser v Schmidt, the court found that the “proclamation of natural rights” in the Kansas constitution “applies to pregnant women” and protects “the ability to control one’s own body”. The proposed amendment would have reversed that decision. Kansas currently allows abortion (with some restrictions) up to the 22nd week of pregnancy but requires ultrasounds and waiting periods, and mandates parental consent for minors, among other rules. The amendment would have permitted Kansas’s legislature to pass laws further restricting abortion or banning it altogether. The thumping outcome in a state that voted for Donald Trump by 15 points in 2020—and that has not opted for a Democratic presidential candidate since Lyndon Johnson won a landslide in 1964—may leave pro-life organisers scratching their heads. Kansas has more unaffiliated voters than registered Democrats; Republican legislators outnumber Democrats 32-17. Conservative legislators dubbed the proposal the “Value Them Both” amendment (referring to women and fetuses) and stayed tight-lipped on which specific restrictions could be introduced. Despite all this, Kansans turned out in record numbers to rebuff the proposal barely six weeks after the Supreme Court swung the abortion issue back to the states in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organisation. The pro-choice campaign triumphed through smart strategy. Instead of slogans explicitly about abortion, it emphasised personal liberty and privacy. The front of the main leaflet distributed by Kansans for Constitutional Freedom, the cannily named group opposing the amendment, simply read “it’s up to us to keep Kansans free”. Television adverts urged viewers to “say no to more government control.” Ashley All of Kansans for Constitutional Freedom, the main group opposing the amendment, says that such messages resonated with a broad group of voters. “Not just progressives” explains Ms All, but also conservatives and libertarians “who really just don’t want government in their business.” The broad-based appeal to keep Kansas’s constitutional right to abortion intact paid off handsomely. Turnout looked to be near double that of the last mid-term primaries, in 2018. In Johnson County, the most populous in the state, about 70% voted against the amendment; in 2020 only 52% of voters in the county chose Joe Biden. More dramatic still, in Franklin County less than 30% of voters opted for Mr Biden in 2020 yet 57% rejected the amendment. In Meade County just 14% backed Mr Biden but nearly 70% voted “no” on August 2nd. The result is all the more remarkable given that the Value Them Both campaign had several big structural advantages. The legislature, dominated by conservative lawmakers, proposed the amendment and chose the August date. Typically in the state, Democrats are less likely to vote in primaries, which are often uncontested, and unaffiliated Kansans are unable to vote in August at all. The ballot question itself was also densely worded, mentioning abortion in cases of rape and incest without ensuring protections for either. Pro-choice campaigners had cried foul, saying the contorted language obscured which vote would actually protect access. Because it was a ballot on an issue, and not a partisan election, faith groups were able to campaign without risking their tax-exempt status. Pastor Micah Hayes had counselled his congregation at the Blue Valley Baptist Church in Olathe to vote in favour of the amendment. “We have seen this vote as a unique opportunity for us to draw a straight line from something the Bible is clear on to something we can actually influence,” he explained. Churches across the state held vigils before the vote. The Archdiocese of Kansas City donated nearly $2.5m to the Value Them Both campaign and offered prayers for the passage of the amendment, available to download through its website. The decision will come as a relief to many well beyond the Sunflower State. Even before the Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade, roughly half of the women getting abortions in Kansas lived outside the state, drawn to its relatively permissive regime and its convenient location in the centre of the country. Since the Dobbs ruling on June 24th, the state has become a refuge for women from neighbouring Oklahoma and Missouri, where near-total bans on the procedure are now in place. The result means that women in Missouri “are not going to lose any more access—the bare minimum we can hope for at this point”, says Michele Landeau of the Missouri Abortion Fund, which helps women pay for the procedure. The decisive outcome boosts Democratic hopes that the issue of abortion will help motivate voters and limit likely losses in the mid-terms, and it also provides a warning for politicians in other states currently legislating abortion bans. In Indiana, a near-total ban on abortion is being debated. Abortion referendums are scheduled later this year in four other states. In California, Michigan and Vermont, the idea is to enshrine the right to an abortion in the state constitution, but in Kentucky the ballot proposition seeks to make explicit the opposite: that no right to an abortion exists (the uncertainty on the matter has led to clinics locking and unlocking in recent weeks) The result in Kansas is an unexpected and significant win for abortion rights, reckons Mary Ziegler, a historian of abortion at the University of California, Davis School of Law. It is, she says, an indication that “ballot initiatives may hold huge promise in the years ahead, even in red states”. Although some states, such as Alabama and West Virginia, have large majorities that seem to favour abortion bans, posing the question as a referendum “might be a way to disaggregate voters’ beliefs on abortion from their party preferences” in picking candidates for public office. Many voters, it seems, want to elect Republicans without giving up reproductive choice. In making its decision in June the Supreme Court envisioned a patchwork quilt of states banning, regulating or permitting abortion in line with the preferences of the people. The referendum in Kansas is as close to direct democracy on the question as America is likely to see. But the translation from popular will into policy is more frayed in other states. A number of trigger bans prohibiting terminations after the Supreme Court ruling were approved years—or decades—ago and do not necessarily reflect the will of the people in those states today. After the Kansas result, conservative legislators elsewhere might think twice before pursuing strict abortion bans. In many cases such laws may be out of step with their constituents’ views. ■