In 1920 revillon Frères, a venerable furrier, sponsored a young film-maker to shoot a movie in the northern reaches of Canada. The company was seeking an innovative and eye-catching way to promote itself, and the director, Robert Flaherty, had previously produced striking footage of the snowy wilds of Belcher Islands. The work that Flaherty delivered for Revillon Frères, “Nanook of the North”, had its premiere a century ago, in 1922. A vivid account of survival in the extreme cold of north-western Quebec, the film was praised by reviewers on its release for its skill and beauty. It is widely considered to be the first popular feature-length documentary; Flaherty earned the moniker “the father of the ethnographic film”. “Nanook of the North” portrays the life of an Inuk hunter and his family as they battle the elements and track down food. It contains some of the classic moments in the corpus of silent cinema: against a vast, desolate Arctic landscape, Nanook hunts a giant walrus, builds an igloo, and smiles and laughs for the camera. The film was distributed widely by Pathé Exchange, which released popular newsreels. But what for decades was taken as the ultimate spectacle of raw, filmed reality was in fact closer to historical re-enactment. The extent of the artifice, though well-known today, remains astonishing. Nanook, for starters, wasn’t called Nanook—this was a screen name, given to an Inuk man named Allakariallak. Nanook’s two on-screen wives were not his real-life partners, but two women playing a role. “Everything from the title character to what they’re following was largely staged,” says Adam Piron, the director of the indigenous programme at the Sundance Film Festival. Rather than a record of Inuit culture as it was in the early 1920s, “Nanook of the North” is a recreation of earlier ways of life. Allakariallak and his countrymen were living in houses, not igloos, and hunting with rifles rather than spears. The film depicted Inuits as a noble, primitive people and was thereby “exoticising indigenous people and relegating them to history and antiquity”, says Mr Piron. In one notorious scene, Nanook is baffled by a phonograph and bites down on the record. The film’s legacy, therefore, is a complicated one. Flaherty received invaluable assistance from skilled Inuits, who operated his cameras and provided the knowledge necessary to achieve the film’s re-enactments. “Nanook of the North” has had its admirers in Inuit communities. This year the centenary of the film has been celebrated by the village of Inukjuak where it was set; a statue of Nanook was unveiled as part of the festivities. At the same time, the struggles for survival that the film purports to lay bare conceal even thornier and bleaker realities. Allakariallak died just a couple of years after filming. (Flaherty blamed the privations of life in the region, but scholars suspect tuberculosis.) Flaherty fathered a child with Alice Nuvalinga, who played one of Nanook’s wives, but never acknowledged his son. The boy, Josephie, was among the many Inuits forced to relocate to even harsher terrain by the Canadian government—a grim story later told in another documentary, “Martha of the North”. Jessica Kotierk, an Inuk conservator who manages the Nunatta Sunakkutaangit Museum in Iqaluit, Canada, acknowledges the profile of “Nanook of the North”, but wishes for other, better representations: “After 100 years, we should have a more accurate and true message.” The centenary has brought this reckoning into sharper relief. Nanook has been described by academics as a form of “salvage ethnography”, a term used for the depiction of indigenous subjects as living relics of the past in need of preservation. Another of Flaherty’s legacies—a respected annual gathering known as the Flaherty Film Seminar, first masterminded by Flaherty’s entrepreneurial wife, Frances—has done its share of soul-searching. A few years ago, it retired its logo of Nanook hurling a spear; this year its parent organisation announced that it would no longer collect royalties on “Nanook of the North” (which is in the public domain). “It honestly was a very quick and obvious decision to make,” says Samara Chadwick, the executive director of the organisation. She says the most recent edition of the Flaherty Seminar, which was co-curated by a leading Native American film-maker, Sky Hopinka, involved discussion of how to “decolonise”. Some might think “Nanook of the North” should itself be retired. Yet both its artistic merits and the moral questions it poses ensure that Flaherty’s most famous work will stay on syllabuses and film programmes, alongside his other globe-trotting features such as “Man of Aran” (set on Ireland’s remote isles) and “Moana” (filmed in Polynesia). Its thornier aspects may be a useful teaching device. “Basically all the issues that we continue to have in documentary can be tracked back to ‘Nanook’,” says Robert Greene of the Jonathan B. Murray Centre for Documentary Journalism. The controversies around Flaherty’s film are a reminder that authenticity and embellishment are not minor considerations in documentary film-making—they are part of the story. ■