Editor’s note (August 16th 2022): A transcript of our interview with Mr Wickremesinghe can be found here. COLOMBO WORE a deserted look as Ranil Wickremesinghe was sworn in as Sri Lanka’s president on July 21st. Fuel shortages kept most cars off the roads—or at least on the sides of them, queuing for petrol. Troops drilled outside the presidential residence and built barricades to protect his office. People sat in their homes, sweltering through hours of power cuts intended to conserve fuel. It was very obviously a country in crisis. Just three weeks later the city feels like a different place. The long queues for fuel have vanished. The noise of traffic has returned. So have the crab and cassava-chip hawkers on the seaside promenade, and the ambling families munching on their snacks. The protesters are gone, some evicted by force, the rest eventually leaving voluntarily. The security presence has dwindled, too. Power cuts, although still commonplace, are markedly shorter. A sense of normality has returned. Mr Wickremesinghe, too, appears more relaxed. Two things have helped bring about the change, he says, speaking to The Economist in the presidential office building, which in early July had been occupied by protesters. The first is that many Sri Lankans were tired of the chaos and wanted law and order. They were willing to give the government a chance to fix things once Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Mr Wickremesinghe’s predecessor and the architect of the country’s economic collapse, had fled the country. The second is that he has shown he is willing to work with all parties and with ordinary citizens. “We were reaching out to everyone,” he says, including the protest movement that helped push out Mr Rajapaksa. In his first speech to Parliament as president, he talked of creating a “People’s Assembly” to solicit views on social and political reforms, and invited young people, including those “engaged in activism” to participate. He is also setting up new oversight committees in Parliament, and inviting youth representatives to join as observers. Mr Wickremesinghe’s first task is to negotiate a bail-out with the IMF. The turmoil of July delayed discussions, but he is optimistic that an initial deal will be struck by September. (Western diplomats in Colombo are more sceptical.) That, he hopes, will increase business confidence and also ease negotiations with other creditors. One of the biggest is China, which recently agreed to forgive some of its loans to Zambia, raising hopes that it might show similar leniency towards other borrowers. But Zambia is a low-income country, notes Mr Wickremesinghe, whereas Sri Lanka remains, despite the economic crisis, a middle-income one: the same model may not apply. The new president promises an avalanche of reforms. He plans to raise income taxes to at least the levels of 2019, when Mr Rajapaksa slashed them, as well as to widen the tax base beyond what it was before the crisis. State-owned enterprises, including the national airline, the petroleum corporation and the government’s stake in the national telecoms firm will be sold off. Mr Wickremesinghe also wants to bring in a bankruptcy law modelled on America’s Chapter 11. “My idea is, do a deep cut,” he says. “When you make changes, make it deep, make all the changes you have to make.” That, he hopes, will allow Sri Lanka’s economy to not just recover but to become more competitive and export-oriented. He also wants Sri Lanka to become more economically integrated with the rest of Asia. “We look at closer relations with ASEAN and RCEP,” he says, referring to the Association of South-East Asian Nations, a grouping of ten countries, and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a big Asian trade agreement. Yet for Mr Wickremesinghe to achieve any of these things he will need Parliament to pass difficult reforms. He is trying to form an all-party government that can claim a broad mandate. But he has made little headway so far. Many lawmakers already have an eye on the next election, due no later than 2025, and see little reason to share the blame for what will be painful tax rises and spending cuts. Basil Rajapaksa, a former finance minister and Gotabaya’s brother, is already said to be plotting a political comeback for the family. Indeed, Mr Wickremesinghe may be getting ahead of himself. He talks fancifully of making Sri Lanka an upper-income country by 2048, of turning it into a new Singapore. Even what he depicts as a more attainable goal seems quite ambitious: “Let’s start by starting by going to the standard of Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam.” For now, many Sri Lankans would be happy for Sri Lanka to get back to where it was a couple of years ago.■