The Destructionists. By Dana Milbank. Doubleday; 416 pages; $30 Progressive Conservatism. By F.H. Buckley. Encounter Books; 254 pages; $31 The Right. By Matthew Continetti. Basic Books; 484 pages; $32 and £25 It is the central question of American politics: how did a man like Donald Trump come to dominate the right, and how does he continue to do it? Since the businessman and television personality won the Republican nomination in 2016, authors, historians, journalists and political insiders have sought to provide an answer. Ahead of the mid-term elections in November, and in anticipation of a political comeback from Mr Trump, three more books interrogate his success. In “Progressive Conservatism” F.H. Buckley, a professor of law at George Mason University, attempts to sketch a coherent intellectual theory of Trumpism. In his version, in 2016 “only Trump ran as a progressive conservative”, the kind that champions civic virtue over corruption, the working man over the crony capitalist and nationalist pride over self-hatred. It is a capacious concept, one that includes presidents Abraham Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt and Dwight Eisenhower. He supplements this analysis with an examination of historical trends in conservative thought, such as the forgotten Western agrarian populists of the original Progressive era more than a century ago. That is interesting, but the theory is hopeless. The author calls Mr Trump “a Hegelian great man who incarnated the spirit and needs of his time”. He also concedes that Mr Trump hardly embodied the values of progressive conservatism while in office. Anyone who encourages the sacking of Congress so that he might keep his grip on power illegitimately cannot have a strong sense of civic duty. Instead—and tellingly—Mr Buckley’s defence of Trumpian greatness depends on attacking others. “Let the Romneyite right-winger parade his indifference and the left-winger preen in his hatreds,” he writes. “The progressive conservative will triumph over both by appealing to the civic virtue of Americans.” The writing is shot through with complaints and whataboutisms directed at the intolerant left, from cracks at Hunter Biden, President Joe Biden’s son, to gripes about “online Robespierres and lgbt bullies” and jibes at the 1619 Project, an essay collection about racism published by the New York Times. The book’s muddled argument is instructive: the ultimate explanation of Trump is not a coherent ideology like “progressive conservatism”, but a reaction to dark fears that the left is seeking to destroy America. Dana Milbank offers a contrasting view in “The Destructionists”. In his columns for the Washington Post he purports to examine “the foolish, the fallacious and the felonious in politics”, usually on the right. In his splenetic new book, Mr Milbank dates the “crack-up” of the Republican Party to various “destructionists” and—to appropriate the author’s trademark style—their depravity, deplorability, mendacity, moral turpitude, rapacity and sycophancy. For Mr Milbank, the destructionism does not have deep roots; instead, the blame rests entirely with Newt Gingrich, the inflammatory Republican leader in Congress in the 1990s. “The epic government failures of the last quarter-century can all be traced back to Gingrich and the savage politics he pioneered,” Mr Milbank asserts. What follows is an exhaustive litany of Republican misdoings over the past 25 years and a carousel tour through the rogues’ gallery of other alleged democratic arsonists: Tucker Carlson, Marjorie Taylor Greene, Rush Limbaugh, Mitch McConnell, Sarah Palin, John Roberts, Paul Ryan and, of course, the former president. It is plain to see that Mr Milbank has a relish, and perhaps even a certain talent, for polemic (also demonstrated by one of his earlier efforts called “Tears of a Clown: Glenn Beck and the Tea Bagging of America”). At times you may blink to check whether the author’s spittle is still visible on the page. But because all his characters are rendered in the same odious light, not much manages to stand out in relief. Seeing clearly requires a vision unclouded either by rage or by sycophancy. Of the three books, Matthew Continetti, a conservative journalist, comes closest to achieving that clarity and thoughtfulness. For him, understanding Mr Trump’s grip on the modern Republican Party requires assessing the past century of right-wing thought. His thoroughly researched intellectual history, “The Right”, reveals many antecedents to Mr Trump in the margins of conservatism: Father Charles Coughlin, whose populist diatribes against Franklin Roosevelt were spread by radio (then a newfangled medium); Charles Lindbergh and his “America First” isolationism; the strongman Huey Long and his embrace of the welfare state; the paranoid conspiracism of anti-communists like Joseph McCarthy and the John Birch Society; George Wallace and his politics of white racial grievance; and Pat Buchanan and his angry politics of cultural revanchism. What held the party together throughout this period of warring ideological factions was a common enemy, sometimes internal and sometimes external: the New Deal, communist saboteurs, the “evil empire” of the Soviet Union, and Islamic terrorism and the “axis of evil”. The brilliance of Mr Trump was to recognise the demise of the last common enemy after the failed “forever wars” in the Middle East. He reforged a winning, lasting coalition out of a new enemy: the modern left and its allies in the media. However crisp, Mr Continetti’s writing is not casual. There is a fondness for categorising and subcategorising various ideological cliques (as well as cataloguing the spats among them rather comprehensively). But the careful historical preparation makes the eventual turn towards explaining the modern malaise of the Republican Party all the more convincing. “Heralded as a transformational president who would enact a second New Deal, Barack Obama ended up the midwife of an anti-elitist, isolationist politics of national populism,” he writes. “Donald Trump was the latest manifestation of a recurring anti-establishment spirit in America.” Though Mr Continetti is no Democrat, his milieu—the bookish writers who once staffed the now-defunct Weekly Standard—has been largely ostracised from the modern Republican Party. Partisan allegiances are not as strong in the wilderness, and his analysis is intellectually honest as a result. That lucidity, already in short supply, may grow even shorter. The temperature of American politics is rising as Mr Trump’s return to the party’s helm beckons. ■