What is love? The question has many answers, yet for Katia and Maurice Krafft there was only one acceptable response. Real love was standing on the edge of a volcano together, one slip away from conflagration, and wondering: “What is it that makes the Earth’s heart beat, its blood flow?” The French couple spent two decades filming pioneering footage of lava and ash; they had witnessed more than 140 eruptions on every continent except Antarctica by the time of their death in 1991. On their final expedition, a pyroclastic flow (an explosive outpouring of gas, ash and lava rocks, often exceeding temperatures of 800°C) from Mount Unzen in Japan burst over them and 41 other people. The pair’s urns were placed together in the temple at the bottom of the mountain. In life and in death, Katia and Maurice never parted. “Fire of Love”, a spectacular new documentary, introduces audiences to the extraordinary pair. They had met at the University of Strasbourg; Katia was studying physics and geochemistry while Maurice focused on geology. Both had been fascinated by volcanoes since childhood and they soon realised a shared interest in eruptions, travelling to photograph sites in Iceland and Italy. As their work gained attention, they were able to traverse the world documenting these active sites. Both Katia and Maurice hated returning from their adventures. Katia would spend her time cataloguing material and editing footage in order to create books and films which might fund future trips. Maurice, who had a performative sensibility, gave talks about their endeavours and obsessed over his (never fulfilled) plans to execute a canoe trip along a lava trail. “They never wanted to be contracted by governments or have bosses,” says Sara Dosa, the director of “Fire of Love”. “They really sought this idealistic way of living by the rhythms of the earth.” Her film tells their story by weaving together clips from the Kraffts’ archive with animations inspired by the drawings they used to collect; Miranda July, a film-maker, narrates their writings. “For me, Katia and volcanoes, it’s a love story,” Maurice said—but theirs was a quieter sort of passion, not histrionic like their chosen field of study. Their footage did not include any shots of them kissing or holding hands. Instead, Katia and Maurice share knowing looks from behind their silver heatproof suits. They wear matching red beanies of the kind sported by Jacques Cousteau, an oceanographer. Maurice clowns around while gallivanting towards the lava. Ms Dosa deploys the film techniques of the French New Wave. Katia and Maurice grew up in the same period as many of these directors, who emerged in the late 1950s in Paris, and “some of the styles and flourishes of that aesthetic movement show up in their work”, she says. The experimental group, which included Jean-Luc Godard and Agnès Varda, rejected traditional ways of storytelling: actors were encouraged to improvise, cameras were hand-held, narratives were freewheeling and, most usefully for Ms Dosa, seemingly disconnected images were juxtaposed to communicate a message. In this way the Kraffts’ exhilarating footage of volcanoes burning and bubbling becomes not only a contribution to volcanology, but an expression of their love. A current of existentialist thought—another New Wave theme—also runs through “Fire of Love”. Maurice, who said he’d prefer “an intense and short life to a monotonous, long one”, was well aware that “our lives are just a blink compared to the life of a volcano”. Both volcanologists loved Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, a French writer who wrote “The Little Prince”, and, like him, believed that “love does not consist of gazing at each other, but in looking outward together in the same direction.” All this makes for beguiling viewing. “Fire of Love” is a masterful ode to a couple who lived by the credo that “curiosity is stronger than fear” and contributed to scientific progress by following their passions. “They were questioning purpose and meaning and existence and the smallness of what it means to be human,” says Ms Dosa. The vital importance of the couple’s work was made clear only a few weeks after they died. They had studied the aftermath of the pyroclastic flow released from Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia in 1985, which destroyed a town and killed around 25,000 people. When Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted in June 1991, more than 350 people were killed, but 58,000 lives were saved by an educational film the Kraffts had made about how to predict when volcanoes would explode. Thanks to their tireless campaigning and research, the local authorities were able to evacuate locals when they spotted the signs of imminent disaster. ■ “Fire of Love” is screening in America and Britain now