INFERTILITY AFFECTS one in six couples, and for half of those, the problem lies with the male partner. Sperm is on the decline. Its concentration and count—the number of sperm per millilitre of semen and the total number of sperm in an ejaculate—has dropped by more than 50% on average in Western countries since the 1970s. No one knows why for sure, but increased rates of obesity, lifestyle factors such as smoking and physical inactivity, and exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals, such as BPAs and phthalates, are the leading theories. “Spermpocalypse”—a scenario in which future men have little or no sperm—is unlikely. For now, sperm meet the basic requirements for human reproduction. But poor-quality sperm is not only linked to the deterioration of men’s overall health, it negatively affects women and children too. Men’s health is a mess. Their lifespans are on average five years shorter than women’s, and they are diagnosed with more chronic diseases. Sperm quality is a biomarker for a man’s overall health and, when abnormal, can indicate serious ailments such as tumours, cancer, diabetes and overall morbidity. Yet sperm is rarely discussed. Its first researcher, the Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, hesitated to share his discovery of the strange “animalcules” in his semen with the scientific world in 1677, worried that his “observations may disgust or scandalise the learned”. Four centuries later, some still squirm about sperm. I have interviewed fertility experts around the world and discovered just how little most people know about this topic. The fertility industry’s marketing only targets women and reminds them of their biological clocks, partly because the word sperm is banned on many ad platforms. But men experience age-related fertility decline starting at 35, too. Every year of a man’s life beyond 35, sperm motility (its movement) decreases, morphology (the percentage of sperm with normal size and shape) goes down and DNA fragmentation, a cause of recurrent miscarriage and birth defects, increases. Increased paternal age puts pregnant women at a greater risk for gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia. Women contribute just a quarter of age-related genetic mutations to a future child. The risk of schizophrenia, Down’s syndrome, bipolar disorder, autism, childhood leukaemia and other cancers in future children increases with paternal age. So does the risk of premature birth, seizures and disabilities like congenital heart disease and cleft palates. Women’s lifestyle choices—what we eat, drink, do, and use on our bodies—are scrutinised from conception through pregnancy. The same factors influence sperm. Unlike eggs which, once chromosomally abnormal, stay that way, sperm can be improved. Producing healthier sperm is simple: avoid hot tubs and saunas, stop cycling, smoking, and recreational drug use (including cannabis), eat less processed food, drink less alcohol, quit fizzy drinks, stay active, sleep more and avoid hormone-disrupting chemicals in household products for three months before trying to conceive. Yet men rarely receive this guidance. Boys get even less reproductive health education than girls, and are often told that men don’t complain about health problems. The result is that many men avoid seeking help until an issue is too big or painful to ignore and male fertility problems go untreated, since, most of the time, symptoms are mild. Urology deals with the urinary tract and andrology addresses infertility, but there is no medical specialty that proactively manages men’s reproductive health as gynaecology does for women. Pre-conception appointments are unusual, too, so the possible side-effects of medications on male fertility are rarely communicated to patients, and unlike risks to pregnancy, are not universally indicated on warning labels. Metformin, for example, is prescribed to over 150m people to treat type-2 diabetes. A recent study suggests that it reduces sperm count and quality and carries another insidious effect: sons of fathers who took it within three months of conception are more likely to have genital birth defects. When couples seek help for infertility, 25% of American men are never even examined by doctors. Ultimately, women are left to undergo invasive, expensive and sometimes unnecessary fertility treatments when all that may be required is a semen analysis, physical exam and lifestyle tweaks. I am tired of watching women shoulder infertility’s physical and emotional burden. I am also the mother of two young boys and worry for their futures if male fertility continues its descent. I do not particularly want to give sperm-freezing as a graduation gift, but if nothing changes, I may have no choice. Raising well-informed, respectful men who understand their sexual health while reproductive health care is in jeopardy feels more critical than ever. So, men, the future is in your hands. Don’t want to go to the doctor? Do a semen analysis from home—it is a proxy for your overall health even if babies are not on your mind. Thinking about conception? Prepare your body to create a human by improving your lifestyle and checking your medications. Governments and policymakers should fund early-youth educational programmes that give boys the tools to better care for their minds and bodies. As a bonus, the same groups should launch a preventative-health initiative for men that includes a semen analysis. That alone could reduce the number of unnecessary fertility treatments and rates of chronic disease. To everyone else: have an honest chat with your son, father or partner about reproductive health. It’s time we embrace these tiny, miraculous cells that are half of the source of human survival for their other superpower—the ability to improve and even save lives. ■ Leslie Schrock is an entrepreneur and investor in health care and technology. She is the author of “Bumpin’: The Modern Guide to Pregnancy” (2019) and “Fertility Rules” (2023). She is an investor in reproductive-health companies including Maven, Legacy and Oath, and sits on the board of advisors at the Moody School of Communication at the University of Texas at Austin.