Populist strongmen often play up their humble origins. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, chased rats in the stairwell of his home as a child. Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, sold tea. For William Ruto, Kenya’s incoming president, it was chickens, which he flogged to lorry drivers as a barefoot schoolboy. Mr Ruto’s backstory does not necessarily mean that he, like Mr Putin and Mr Modi, will develop authoritarian tendencies in office. But there is much about his past that is troubling. Who is he? Mr Ruto got his start in politics under the dictatorship of Daniel arap Moi, a fellow Kalenjin from Kenya’s Rift Valley. Forced into the unfamiliar position of having to contest a competitive election in 1992, Moi’s ruling party needed a muscular youth wing. By all accounts, Mr Ruto served it well. Moi was duly re-elected (albeit amid allegations of intimidation and bribery concerning the youth element). His protégé was elected to parliament five years later, aged 31. Moi asked him to groom Uhuru Kenyatta, the son of Kenya’s first president, as his successor. The seeds of a turbulent relationship were sown. After Mr Kenyatta was defeated in 2002, he and Mr Ruto found themselves on opposing sides when the following election, in 2007, triggered the worst ethnic violence in independent Kenya’s history. Members of Mr Ruto’s Kalenjin tribal federation attacked Mr Kenyatta’s Kikuyu, at one point setting fire to a church, burning 30 women and children alive. Kikuyu militiamen retaliated. More than 1,000 people died. Both leaders were eventually charged with crimes against humanity by the International Criminal Court (ICC). Mr Ruto’s political career looked more likely to end in a foreign prison than in Kenya’s top office. Political reinvention, however, is a staple of Kenyan politics. The two men forged an alliance, portrayed the ICC as a neo-colonialist tool and won the next election, in 2013, on a platform of protecting Kenya’s sovereignty against Western interference. Mr Kenyatta became president, Mr Ruto his deputy and anointed successor. In office, they saw off the ICC charges, which they both denied. Witnesses recanted or disappeared. The prosecution complained of interference, but little could be done. Both cases collapsed. Betrayal is another staple of Kenyan politics. After securing re-election, Mr Kenyatta turned on his deputy, perhaps because their marriage of convenience had served its purpose, and endorsed his former opponent, Raila Odinga, as his favoured successor. Mr Ruto’s chances of winning this month’s election should have been slight. Not only was he denied the resources of the state, but most presumed he would lose the votes of the Kikuyu, Kenya’s biggest tribe. Instead, alienated by his family’s vast wealth and his perceived failure to root for his tribe in office, the Kikuyu thumbed their noses at Mr Kenyatta. Their votes ensured that Mr Ruto carried the day, although a court petition challenging his victory is certain. Convincing the Kikuyu that a man once charged with instigating the mass murder of their kinsmen deserves to be president testifies to Mr Ruto’s political skills. He is the first Kenyan politician to transcend ethnicity by appealing to class. Only a self-made man could truly understand the poor, he argued. Only he could break a system that had concentrated wealth and power in the hands of a dynastic elite epitomised by the Kenyatta family. Many poor Kenyans liked the message. They also liked the way it was delivered. Mr Ruto comes across as self-effacing, erudite and devout. He responded to his victory by quoting from the prophets Jeremiah and Isaiah on Twitter and mentioned God six times in his acceptance speech. He has a habit of slightly sucking in his lower-lip every time he deprecates himself. Those tactics worked on the campaign trail, and may yet serve him in office. Daniel arap Moi was known in Kenya as the “Professor of Politics”. His former pupil may prove a worthy successor. ■ More from The Economist explains:What is a recession?What makes a global financial centre?The increase in simultaneous heatwaves