It has the air of a paradox. The new leader of the Philippines, Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos, helped crank up a cult around his late dictator father, also Ferdinand, which he used to cruise to a massive victory in May’s presidential election. Marcos senior bilked the country and brutalised its citizens. Yet in his first weeks in office Bongbong, in words and actions, has emphasised an entirely different approach, that of good governance. Crucial members of Mr Marcos’s cabinet are notable for their pragmatism and experience. Ministers in charge of the economy have a technocratic bent and a firm conviction that improved infrastructure and a reformed tax code will bring investment and growth. In his first state-of-the-union address late last month, the new president focused on areas of the economy that affect the most livelihoods in the country of 110m, most notably agriculture (he made himself agriculture secretary). He stuffed his state-of-the-union speech with facts, figures and goals, such as raising farm output. He has gone out of his way to get businessmen on board with his programmes, unlike his predecessor, Rodrigo Duterte. Mr Marcos has displayed fiscal prudence. And he swiftly sought to renegotiate loans on three railway projects that had been offered by China. They threatened to burden the Philippines with unsustainable debts. Mr Duterte left him little in the kitty. As for security and foreign affairs, he has gone for professionalism over favouritism here too. His choice of chief-of-staff of the armed forces is well-regarded. The new foreign secretary, Enrique Manalo, is a career diplomat respected at home and abroad for his competence. The renegotiation of the railway projects suggests that Mr Marcos may not be quite the China patsy that some in the foreign-policy establishment had feared. Equally, he may set aside the animus the Marcos family feels towards America, which it blames for the fall of Marcos senior by withdrawing support in the final period of his rule. The president was visibly chuffed to get a call from President Joe Biden after winning the presidency. This week America’s top diplomat, Antony Blinken, plans to call on Mr Marcos and Mr Manalo in Manila. Much of the approach that Mr Marcos is unveiling is at odds not only with that of his kleptocratic father, but also with his own tenure as a legislator and provincial governor. They were marked by apparent cluelessness and sloth. Now, those who have dealt with him as president say that he turns up on time, has read his briefs and engages in substantive discussion about domestic and foreign affairs. If that is a paradox, perhaps the most convincing explanation of it is that Mr Marcos is seeking redemption for his family after his father’s cruel and disastrous rule. And in rehabilitating the family’s reputation, says Jay Batongbacal of the University of the Philippines, Mr Marcos “has a lot to prove”. The paradox is all the more plausible given that it is not necessarily motivated by selflessness. Philippine presidents serve for a single, six-year term. But, by ensuring the elevation of his 28-year-old son, Sandro, as the majority bloc’s deputy leader in the House of Representatives and by bringing him along to the cabinet and to meetings with foreign dignitaries, Mr Marcos is patently grooming the next Marcos for the top job, probably in 2034. The dynasty will flourish by promoting prosperity, not plunder. The alternative explanation is that Mr Marcos’s apparently sound administration is not a paradox, but an illusion. “Judge me not by my ancestors, but by my actions,” he has said. Yet very little he does or says suggests shame over his father’s deeds. On the contrary, he was sworn in using the same Bible as his father. In his state-of-the-union address Mr Marcos praised his father’s accomplishments. The family narrative is of a golden era in which the only victims are themselves. A huge supporting movement on social media burnishes the Marcos myth with falsehoods while demonising the liberal establishment; its techniques resemble those of the cultish movements behind Donald Trump, China’s Xi Jinping or Narendra Modi, India’s leader. Mr Marcos’s good governance might, on this reading, prove ephemeral, to be replaced by something more louche, more threatening and more corrupt. In a year the president will be able to appoint allies whom rules bar from immediately joining the administration after having run for public office. He will then come under pressure to replace the technocrats with cronies. It is an old joke that a new Philippines is born every six years. The joke works, of course, because it is not true. Mr Marcos’s new Philippines is pointedly built on the very worst period of the past. So the odds are even more stacked against it working out this time. Yet the odds have improved in Bongbong’s first weeks in office. ■