EUROPE IS EXPERIENCING its worst drought in 500 years. That is the dire assessment of the Joint Research Centre, the European Commission’s scientific advisory body. According to its latest report, published on August 22nd, nearly half of Europe’s land mass is now in drought. That is because the continent received just 20% of its usual rainfall last winter and spring. The dry conditions have coupled with extreme heat this summer. Temperatures in July were 0.7°C above the 1991-2020 average, the sixth highest on record. Other parts of the world are experiencing drought, too. A heat wave in China has persisted for a record 73 days. In Gao, a county in Sichuan province, temperatures reached 43.5°C (110.3°F) on August 21st. Rainfall in the Yangtze river basin, the world’s third-longest river system, is the lowest since records began in 1961. Vast swathes of America are also parched. Some 130m people in the country are now affected by drought, a 70% increase compared with last year. The drought conditions are perhaps most noticeable among the world’s river systems. An analysis by Dominic Royé of the University of Santiago de Compostela in Spain finds that river levels are severely depleted relative to their historic average. According to data provided by the EU’s Earth-observation programme, Copernicus, rivers in south-western America were 35% lower in June to August when compared with their 1980-2021 average. Similarly, in Western Europe river levels are 20% lower than the long-run average, and in China they are 9% lower. Drying rivers have numerous knock-on effects for both the environment and the economy. The river Po in northern Italy has been so low that sea water has begun intruding inland. Despite recent rains, parts of the Rhine in Germany remain unnavigable for large ships. The lack of water in France has closed power stations and more than 100 municipalities have experienced disruptions to their supply of drinking water. Chinese authorities have said that they expect crop yields to be severely curtailed for the coming harvest. In America, Lake Mead and Lake Powell, man-made reservoirs that generate power for 4m people, are near their “dead pool” levels. If they reach that point, they can no longer provide water downstream. Unfortunately, there is unlikely to be much respite soon. Meteorologists at Copernicus expect river flows to remain low across much of the northern hemisphere over the coming months. Although there is some hope that the weakening of La Niña next year could restore rain to its normal patterns, the long-term outlook remains dire because of anthropogenic climate change. For every 1°C of warming the atmosphere can hold 6-7% more moisture, which is already making rainfall patterns more erratic, leading to greater extremes both in droughts and floods. When the heavens do open up, flash floods often follow. ■ For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter.