For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter The federal reserve raised its benchmark interest rate by three-quarters of a percentage point on July 27th to tackle rising prices. Although the central bank’s governors were focused on the headline inflation rate, currently 9.1%, America’s Bureau of Labour Statistics also publishes inflation figures for nearly two dozen metropolitan areas, from Seattle to Tampa. These data show that inflation varies considerably from place to place. In New York, prices were 6.7% higher in June than they were a year earlier. In Phoenix, meanwhile, inflation is running at 12.3% (see chart). There are several reasons for these regional differences. Take the labour market. Government statistics show that higher job growth is associated with higher inflation. In New York and San Francisco, where inflation is relatively low, employment has fallen in the past two years by 4.8% and 4.2%, respectively. In Phoenix and Atlanta, where inflation is high, employment is up by 1.6% and 1.9% over the same period. The property market matters, too. A recent report by Redfin, a property brokerage, shows that cities that attracted more prospective homebuyers in the second quarter also experienced higher inflation. These differences pose problems for policymakers. When inflation varies significantly from one place to another, central bankers may be torn between loosening monetary policy for low-inflation areas and tightening it for high-inflation ones. This is especially true when regional inflation rates fall above and below official targets. In June 2015 prices in the Detroit metro area were down by 2.4% on the previous year, a rate of deflation that would normally call for expansionary policy action. But inflation in San Francisco was 2.3%, not far from the Fed’s 2% target. (The Fed ultimately raised rates by a quarter of a point in December of that year.) An analysis of historical data shows that regional inflation dispersion—measured by the gap between the highest and lowest local inflation rate—is at its widest in nearly 40 years. For people in Phoenix that means a 9% increase in food prices from a year ago, 17% higher housing costs and a 77% rise in the price of petrol. Such places might need more aggressive action from the central bank to get back on course. ■