YOUNG PEOPLE are far less likely than the old to suffer serious illness if they contract covid-19. That is one reason why they might be less likely to get vaccinated. Indeed, by August 3rd 65% of 18- to 24-year olds in America had been fully vaccinated, compared with 92% of those aged 65 or more. But vaccines are meant to protect not just the recipients, but more vulnerable groups too. A new study based on American universities finds that this is the case. In areas close to universities where staff and students were obliged to be vaccinated, rates of infection and death were lower than in areas near other universities without such obligations (see chart). For the 2021 academic year some 668 American colleges required students to be vaccinated. To analyse the effects of this, the working paper published by the National Bureau of Economic Research compared 269 “mandate counties”, where at least one university required vaccination, with 284 “non-mandate counties”, where no such regulations were in place. Mandate counties were likelier than non-mandate counties to be in urban areas, where a concentrated population helps covid spread faster. The people living there were also, on average, wealthier, more Democratic and had higher rates of vaccination. They may also have also been likelier to wear masks and to observe social distancing. To measure the effects of the mandates, while accounting for these demographic differences, the authors compared the change in cases, deaths and hospitalisations within each county before and after students returned to university. Over 13 weeks, the mandates led to 339 fewer cases and 5.4 fewer deaths per 100,000 people than there otherwise would have been. An estimated 7,300 deaths were averted in the mandate counties (or 5% of total covid deaths in America during this period). The study estimates the economic benefit of the mandates (in averted health-care costs, lost earnings and so forth) might have been $27m per 100,000 people, using established economic models on the value of averting a fatality. Many Americans, including some Republican politicians, saw the mandates as an affront to liberty. But they worked, helping to limit more widespread illness and loss of life. Some universities have dropped their mandates as the new term begins. And as students and staff return to campuses this month, university towns will be hoping the worst of the pandemic is behind them. ■ For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter.