Editor’s note: On Sunday evening Palestinian Islamic Jihad said that an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire was due to take effect in Gaza at 23:30 local time. This article has been updated accordingly. The latest Israeli offensive against Gaza was well planned and not at all surprising. On August 5th a swift series of drone raids killed a commander, and missile teams, of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (pij). Israel said it was acting pre-emptively to prevent an imminent attack on Israelis living near Gaza’s border. The ensuing events were just as predictable. pij retaliated with barrages of rockets and mortar shells aimed at Israeli towns. Nearly all of them fell harmlessly on open land, or were intercepted by Israeli Iron Dome missile-defence batteries deployed in advance. Israel responded with more air strikes, killing another commander of pij. In three days of fighting, more than 40 Palestinians are reckoned to have been killed in Gaza, with no casualties so far on the Israeli side. Israel insists that it has targeted only militants, and that most of the Gazan civilians who have been killed were victims of malfunctioning pij rockets that fell far short of their targets. It was the most serious round of warfare between Israel and Gaza since an 11-day war in May 2021, when 270 people were killed, mainly Palestinians. But this time the attacks and counter-attacks were more limited. On Sunday evening, PIJ said a ceasefire would begin at 23.30 local time, after talks brokered by Egypt. Hamas, the larger Palestinian movement, which has controlled Gaza for the past 15 years, kept out of the fray. This is partly because it is satisfied to see its smaller rival pulverised by the Israelis, and partly because it is reluctant to jeopardise the modest improvement in Gaza’s economy since the last big bout of violence last year. Since then the Israeli government, under a policy unofficially called “shrinking the conflict”, has refused to engage with the Palestinians to seek a political solution to the century-old conflict, but has sought to create financial incentives for stability. In Gaza’s case this has meant issuing 14,000 daily work permits to bring much-needed cash into the enclave. Israel has also allowed some infrastructure to be built, and has gradually eased the border closure it and Egypt have imposed since Hamas came to power in a coup in 2007. “All of a sudden Hamas has a lot more to lose,” says an Israeli intelligence official. “They’re now in a position of responsibility for maintaining a level of economic stability. But they can afford to remain on the sidelines only for a limited time before they start being accused of collaborating with Israel.” Hamas and pij were founded in the 1980s as radical Islamist movements to resist Israel’s occupation of Gaza. In 1993, when the Palestine Liberation Organisation entered the so-called Oslo process with Israel, opening the way to setting up a semi-autonomous Palestinian Authority in parts of the West Bank and Gaza, both Islamist movements refused to join in. Instead, they stuck to their stated aim of destroying Israel. However, while pij, which is heavily funded by Iran, has remained a small outfit wedded to violence, Hamas has been trying in recent years to improve its ties with Egypt, the Saudis and other Arab regimes, agreeing in principle to a long-term truce with Israel. A short Israeli offensive that leaves pij weakened without causing too much damage in Gaza could even work in Hamas’s favour. There are political considerations on the Israeli side as well. Israel’s new prime minister, Yair Lapid, has been in office for only five weeks, and is facing a tough battle for re-election on November 1st. Unlike the two other main candidates—the former long-serving prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, and the current defence minister, Benny Gantz—Mr Lapid lacks a military record and experience of leading his country in war. Brief as it was, if the Gaza campaign turns out to have pegged back the PIJ and kept Hamas out of the fray without incurring Israeli casualties, his security credentials may be boosted. But it is a risk. Gaza has a way of sucking Israeli leaders into the maw when they least expect it. ■