August in france is a month when diaries empty faster than a glass of chilled rosé in Saint-Tropez. Emmanuel Macron, though, is not the sort to lie idly on the beach, even on holiday. On day one this week at his official residence on the Mediterranean the French president was already on the phone to his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky. It was in August three years ago that Mr Macron hosted Vladimir Putin on the Med. Clutching a bouquet of flowers, the Russian leader bounded up the stone steps to greet him. To the consternation of those who considered Mr Putin even then to be thoroughly infréquentable, the visit served as confirmation that Mr Macron’s approach to Russia was at odds with that of much of the rest of Europe. The memory of this charm offensive frames the way others judge Mr Macron’s approach to Russia’s brutal war on Ukraine. If Germany erred by failing to see the geopolitical risk posed by its reliance on cheap Russian gas, France’s mistake was to think right up until the eve of war that it could sweet-talk Mr Putin into better behaviour. No Western leader has spoken to Mr Putin more often than Mr Macron (19 times this year). No other Western leader called before the war for a “new security architecture” to include Russia, nor after it started urged allies not to “humiliate” Russia. As the war drags on and Europeans feel the energy crunch, no Western leader is as readily suspected by some of his own friends of wanting to push Ukraine into suing for peace. Charges in the Francophobic British press that Mr Macron is a Munich-style appeaser are jingoistic and overblown. But he also draws criticism from more reasonable voices, from Estonia to Ukraine itself, which cannot so easily be dismissed. Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister, was particularly incensed by Mr Macron’s call for Russia not to be humiliated. Behind the suspicion of France’s motives are also deep reservations in some quarters at the prospect of according a big role in any future peace negotiations to France and Germany. They, after all, were the pair that handled the flawed “Minsk” agreements in 2014 and 2015. So what has Mr Macron really been up to, and how, if at all, has his approach changed? A glimpse of an answer was aired in France in June, in a fly-on-the-wall documentary about his diplomacy over Ukraine. It is gripping, not least for capturing the way a small presidential team fashions policy from the corridors of the Elysée Palace, bypassing the foreign ministry. The film records the lengths to which Mr Macron went, despite the risk to his credibility, to try to talk sense into Mr Putin and avert bloodshed, often at Mr Zelensky’s request. “Emmanuel, it’s very important that you speak to Putin,” insists the Ukrainian president, in English, his grave voice echoing on speakerphone from war-torn Kyiv amid the 18th-century Parisian splendour. Less flatteringly, the film exposes the undue faith Mr Macron put in reason to deal with the ruthless Russian autocrat. During a phone call on February 20th the French president is by turns cordial, stern and acerbic. “I don’t know where your legal adviser studied law,” snaps Mr Macron. When Mr Putin cuts the call short, saying he is at the gym, Mr Macron thinks the Russian has agreed to meet President Joe Biden. Four days later Mr Putin sent in the tanks. Looking back, a sober Mr Macron reflects on failure: “I thought we could find a path based on trust and intellectual discussion with Putin.” It didn’t work out, says the narrator. “No,” the president admits. Overconfident in his powers of persuasion Mr Macron may be. Played by the Russian leader, perhaps. But to conclude that France is soft on Mr Putin would be wrong. For one thing Mr Macron’s declarations, however poorly timed and freighted with subordinate clauses, are more nuanced than selective citation suggests. He has urged allies not to humiliate Russia, not Mr Putin himself, and only after the fighting stops. He has never called for territorial concessions, nor for premature peace talks, arguing that these are “up to Ukraine alone” to decide. Clarity can too often be a casualty of Mr Macron’s addiction to complexity. What is more, the French president has upped his show of support for Ukraine. He has sent state-of-the-art Caesar howitzers to the front, reinforced France’s nato presence in Romania and welcomed Ukraine’s application to join the eu while on a (very belated) trip to Kyiv on June 16th. France is “unambiguously” on Ukraine’s side, he declared, finally grasping that it needed to be spelt out, adding 12 days later that Russia “cannot and must not win”. The French are as worried as anybody about the broader precedent set, including for China, if Russia gets to keep land it has grabbed so bloodily. Since his trip to Kyiv Mr Macron has hardened his tone, calling Russia an “imperial colonial power” and denouncing a massacre on July 29th at a Russia-controlled prison. Presidential aides insist that France is fully prepared to withstand domestic pressure to ease sanctions. But what differentiates Mr Macron from the hawks are his doubts about Ukraine’s ability to push Russia back any time soon. The central scenario in Paris is a long conflict, with no imminent victory, no peace talks, continuing sanctions and an outcast Russia. Such a prospect is bleak, not least for a leader who had once hoped to bind Russia to Europe. Indeed the dark drumbeat to Mr Macron’s musings these days is the phrase “the return of the tragic to history”. Mr Putin may have succeeded in reviving nato. But a long war will test transatlantic unity, as well as Europe’s staying power. And the longer it lasts, the more it will force Europe to contemplate a post-Biden future, with a less engaged America. That in many ways has been Mr Macron’s strategic calculation all along: that Europe may end up left on its own, facing a recalcitrant Russia, and so needs to prepare. Like it or not, it is a coherent worldview, even if not a thought to relax with on the beach. ■ Read more from Charlemagne, our columnist on European politics:Germans have been living in a dream (Jul 21st)Down with long school summer breaks (Jul 16th)Travel chaos in Europe is a glimpse of a future with few spare workers (Jul 9th)