Few of the transformations visited upon Ukraine over the last six months have been as extraordinary as that of Mariupol’s Philharmonic Hall. On February 14th it staged a concert on the theme of love, sending the audience into raptures with a spirited version of the wine-and-romance chorus from Verdi’s “La Traviata”. Weeks later, its basement was taking in terrified survivors from the city’s theatre after it was destroyed by a Russian bomb. The hall now looks set for another grim twist, as the setting for a televised show trial of Ukrainian prisoners of war. On August 10th a reporter from the propaganda arm of Russia’s armed forces broadcast images of busy preparations: of wide-mesh steel cages that would not be out of place in a lion enclosure. “The criminals will be led to the cages through a steel corridor,” he explained. The trial was due to start on August 24th, Ukraine’s independence day, but was postponed for unknown reasons. The reprieve is likely to be temporary; local sources suggest the start is now set for the second week of September. Denis Pushilin, the head of the Russian-controlled Donetsk People’s Republic (dpr), used a recent appearance on Russian propaganda networks to describe plans for a trial of 80 captured soldiers from Ukraine’s controversial Azov regiment, among others. The tribunal’s impartiality would be assured by international observers from Syria, Belarus, Russia and, possibly, North Korea, he said, without a hint of irony. Russia has long angled for a public reckoning for the soldiers it has cast as neo-Nazis—not least as a way of deflecting attention from its own atrocities. The reality of the Azov regiment was always more nuanced. Although it is true that during its early years, in 2015 and 2016, the unit did include some unwholesome members of the far right, it evolved and was in recent years better known for discipline and combat preparedness. That resolve was demonstrated in abundance during a remarkable defence of Mariupol that lasted nearly three months, latterly conducted from the town’s behemoth Azovstal steel plant and its cold-war system of deep bunkers. It tied down 14,000 Russian soldiers, and helped Ukraine ensure an unexpected Russian retreat from around Kyiv at the end of March. On May 16th-17th, a deal brokered by the un and the Red Cross saw approximately 2,500 of the Mariupol garrison surrender to Russia. But the safety guarantees Russia gave proved to be worth little when a number of the fighters were blown up in a suspicious explosion at a prison in nearby Olenivka. There are credible reports of torture, and of at least one other death in detention. Russia makes little secret of its resentment of the Azov soldiers, in a way that makes the chances of a fair hearing remote. A tweet from its London embassy declared that a firing squad would be too good for them. Anna Kalunchuk, a lawyer representing five of the soldiers, said Russia may yet try to use the legal black hole of the unrecognised dpr to pass down death sentences. Russia has already ignored all its responsibilities under the Geneva Conventions, she said. Vladyslav Zhaivoronok, an injured pow released in a limited exchange on June 29th, claimed a Russian interrogator threatened to kill him—and this was before doctors were even allowed to give him antibiotics for his amputated leg. “Russia can only imitate the civilised world, and this parody of a court will do nothing but deliver a preordained verdict,” he said. Ukrainian anger over the treatment of its pows has been exacerbated by what it describes as the inaction of the international guarantors. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, says it is difficult to describe the work of the International Red Cross positively. It has taken a “maximally passive position”, he says. It has ignored evidence of Russian torture and is making no serious attempt to inspect the scene of the attack in Olenikva. “The work the organisation has done in registering Ukrainian pows and passing on letters is not commensurate with the millions of dollars of donations it received to tackle the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine.” A spokesman for the International Red Cross rejected that characterisation, and said the organisation was doing its best to secure access to Ukrainian pows in difficult circumstances. Mr Podolyak says Kremlin strategists think they need a televised show as a way of sustaining the level of manufactured hatred at home, but he repeated his president’s warnings that any such development would mark a point of no return for possible future negotiations. Katerina Prokopenko, the wife of the Azov regiment’s commander, Denis Prokopenko, who is believed to be being held in Russia, wondered if the aim of the process might be wider: to humiliate Ukraine and its war heroes. “That the Russians would be so barbaric is no surprise,” she said. “What is astonishing is that in the 21st century the international community believes there is nothing it can do to stop it.”■