It came not a moment too soon for gun-toting Americans. When the Supreme Court struck down a New York gun law in June, the justices extended the right to bear arms outside the home. More guns—their proponents argue—will result in less crime; armed victims will stop assailants in their tracks. New research shows that argument to be dangerously flawed (see chart). America has more guns than people. The right to bear arms is enshrined in its constitution. Yet until recently the Second Amendment was little more than a relic of America’s early republic. Just 35 years ago, 43 states had strict rules limiting the carrying of guns outside the home (if they allowed it at all). The gun lobby has managed to reverse that. Carrying a concealed weapon without a permit is now allowed in half of America’s states. The Supreme Court’s new ruling will make it even harder to restrict carrying a concealed weapon. To assess the impact of the ruling, look to the states that have adopted right-to-carry laws. A team at Stanford and Duke universities studied crime data between 1979 and 2019 in some of America’s biggest cities. They found, perhaps unsurprisingly, that more concealed weapons were associated with an increase in crime. Their statistical model estimated that aggravated assault rose by 11% (compared with what would have been expected if the gun laws had not been eased). Violent crime increased by 13% and robbery by 15%. The number of crimes involving guns also went up. The use of firearms in robberies increased by an average of 32%; in violent crimes, by 29%. The adoption of right-to-carry laws has also been associated with an increase in the theft of guns and a decrease in the rate at which police solve violent crimes. The latter is presumed to be a result of the burden of investigating additional gun thefts, processing more accidental discharges and confronting more people with guns. What’s more, there is no evidence that extending the right to carry boosts armed citizens’ ability to stop criminals in the act. Between 1992 and 2001 41% of Americans lived in states with right-to-carry laws. Between 2007 and 2011 that share grew to 67%. Yet the proportion of victims of crimes who used guns to defend themselves remained the same, 0.9%. So much for making the country safer. ■