When “Russian Hackers”, a new documentary TV series, first aired on February 23rd, its director Andrei Loshak felt little sense of triumph. It had been a tough year. He’d fought with his producers for months, and was eventually forced to cut a section that linked criminal hackers to Russian intelligence services. Even before the series was released, Russia Today, a pro-Kremlin TV channel, reported that he’d received funding from the CIA. The authorities were sending him a message. Over the years, the scope for journalistic investigations in Russia has narrowed. Loshak left NTV, one of Russia’s main TV channels, because it increasingly toed the official line. He freelanced for several independent broadcasters, along with Current Time, based in Prague, which is supported by the American government. In 2019 the Russian government designated anyone working for an organisation that received funding from abroad as a “foreign agent”, so he had to cut ties with Current Time. “I felt stuck,” he told me. “I realised I would never be able to work with Russian online platforms.” Wide awake in the small hours after his series aired, Loshak was scrolling through Telegram, an encrypted messaging app, when he saw that the invasion of Ukraine had begun. He knew exactly what this meant for independent journalists like him. “Our future has been crossed out,” he posted. Loshak’s wife, Ira, a producer who sometimes works on his films, had long been eager to leave Russia. Loshak, who is in his late 40s, wanted to put down roots. The couple had a five-year-old son and Loshak had just found a plot of land on which he wanted to build a house. “I’ve lived in Moscow all my life. I didn’t plan on leaving,” he said. But Vladimir Putin’s invasion left him with no choice. Rumours spread that there would be a general mobilisation and borders might close. Opposition activists and independent journalists knew they were particularly under threat. “People in my bubble started to panic,” Loshak told me. Some scrubbed their phones of any evidence of political activity and drove to Finland or Estonia. Seats on flights out of the country were snapped up. On March 2nd Loshak got a message from a friend about a charter flight leaving for Armenia in three hours – the ticket price was $1,000, more than three times the average price for a round trip in 2021. Though he already had a ticket for a flight the following day, Loshak dropped everything, threw “all the wrong stuff” into a bag and headed to the airport in a taxi. It was the right call – the flight he’d booked ended up being grounded because of sanctions. Loshak flew on to Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia and a city he knew well, joining a wave of Russian activists and journalists looking for a haven. It was snowing when he arrived and his Georgian friends joked that they had brought the cold with them from Moscow. Ten days later, Ira and their son Boris joined him. Loshak found an apartment after a week, paid for with the money he’d set aside to buy land. The most important thing was that his family was with him. “I was extremely lucky,” he said. At least 200,000 people are thought to have left Russia since war broke out: artists and journalists who fear persecution for their views; rich people looking to avoid sanctions or conscription; employees of international companies. Georgia and Armenia are favoured destinations because Russians don’t need visas, many people speak their language and it’s cheaper to live there than in Europe or North America. Russia invaded Georgia in 2008 and maintains a military presence in two separatist regions. As a result, most of Georgia’s population is staunchly anti-Russian; the Ukrainian flag is displayed in solidarity across Tbilisi. The position of the Georgian government is less clear, however: many Georgians believe that it is a puppet of Bidzina Ivanishvili, an elusive tycoon who once served as prime minister. Georgians I talked to were worried that the government, led by the Georgian Dream party, is increasingly taking its cues from Moscow. It has refused to officially condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine or join international sanctions against Moscow; some Russian activists have been denied entry. Tens of thousands of Russians have arrived in Georgia since the war began. An anarchist called Ira Wolf told me she’d stood terrified at the border-control booth at the airport, trying not to blink. The words “NO WAR” were tattooed on her eyelids and she had tried to cover them up with thick eyeshadow. Some new arrivals in Tbilisi opened bars and clubs; others joined humanitarian organisations providing aid to Ukrainians. Activists clustered around the Free Russia Foundation, an NGO founded in 2014 in Washington, DC, to promote democracy in Russia. When I spoke to them, the initial shock of displacement had worn off and they were exhausted. One activist told me, “We cannot plan. Everything is unknown. I am totally burnt out.” They were anxious about money and where they might live. Above all, they wondered how they might continue the fight against Putin from exile. The co-ordinator of the Free Russia Foundation in Tbilisi, Anton Mikhalchuk, fled Siberia in 2019 when facing prosecution for working for a prohibited NGO. He has a blond handlebar moustache and a serious mien. Since the war began, police have searched his parents’ and girlfriend’s flats in Russia and friends have been called in for questioning. Mikhalchuk estimated there were currently about 1,500 Russian activists in Georgia. Free Russia now organises conferences and demonstrations against war. In one part of the office, a municipal councillor from a Russian opposition party, a lawyer representing jailed activists and an anti-Kremlin blogger huddled over laptops. Next to them a lecture was in progress on how to use cryptocurrencies to fund activism. The sudden influx of Russian exiles in March caused a spike in rental prices in Tbilisi. There were some grumbles and isolated incidents of Georgians shouting or spitting at Russian-speakers in cafés or supermarkets (in at least one case the victims turned out to be Ukrainian). But in general, a common enmity towards the Putin regime united the incomers and their hosts. One Sunday afternoon I went to an open day hosted by Emigration for Action, an organisation founded by exiled activists to raise money for Ukrainian refugees by staging social events for Russians. Under a poster that read “Tattoos for Action”, a young musician called Vika Oceansburning, with fuchsia hair and bubblegum-pink eyeshadow, was having the words “SO TIRED” inked inside her wrist. “Why are you so tired?” I asked her. “I’m so tired of this shit.” She had gone to anti-war protests in St Petersburg almost every day, but only a few hundred people came out onto the streets. A friend of hers was arrested in mid-March, charged with “putting fragments of paper in place of price tags, containing knowingly false information about the use of the Russian armed forces”. Prosecutors are seeking a ten-year sentence. Oceansburning was gentler than her fierce name suggested. She missed her mother and wondered whether she would see her again. This was her first time outside Russia. “I like this country”, she said of Georgia, “because I feel free. I understand here that people respect me and my rights. It’s incredible. I’m not afraid of the police.” The slogans “Fuck Putin” and “Fuck the War” were printed in small letters on her top. “In St Petersburg I would go to jail for this T-shirt,” she said. I asked another activist how she felt about being Russian. There was a long pause. “It’s the most difficult question,” she said, finally. “Really it feels like being German in the 1930s or 1940s. Your country has started a war, but you’re trying to fight against this as much as you can. You can’t stop it, but despite this, it’s the responsibility of every Russian – we have to take responsibility for it.” Loshak is shy, with a soft voice and self-deprecating smile. “He speaks Russian like Dostoyevsky,” said my translator, “in complete and erudite sentences.” When Loshak arrived in Tbilisi, he found himself among friends and colleagues from the last vestiges of independent media in Russia. They have been prevented from doing their work by a new law criminalising the use of the word “war” to describe Russia’s “special operation” in Ukraine. At first, Loshak planned to go to Odessa, the Ukrainian city on the Black Sea coast: it was his father’s hometown and he had spent many happy summers there. His Russian passport made that impossible. Instead he threw himself into a project documenting the schism in Russian society between opponents and supporters of Putin. This divide widened in 2014 when Russia annexed Crimea and backed separatist movements in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine. Some Russians were proud that Crimea had been “returned”; others saw the occupation as a crime. “People stopped understanding each other,” he said. The recent invasion dramatically magnified this split, even within families and between friends. “Stories appeared everywhere,” he told me. “‘I can’t live with my boyfriend or my girlfriend any longer,’ or ‘I have stopped talking to my mother.’” Loshak got back in touch with Current Time TV and found a production company in Russia willing to work with him as long as he remained anonymous. He conducted the shoot remotely in Tbilisi, interviewing people online. Almost everyone on the project went by a pseudonym; only two cameramen, one in Tbilisi and one in Moscow, were happy to be identified. The cameraman in Moscow, Loshak laughed, “is a totally crazy guy”. The documentary, “Broken Ties”, aired online on June 19th. (A subtitled version is on YouTube.) In it, a paediatrician describes her feelings of shame and guilt at watching videos of the Russian attack on Kyiv; her mother insists, “I believe in everything our president is doing.” A young woman under Russian bombardment in Kharkiv cannot understand why her brother in the Russian city of Novorossiysk won’t acknowledge that Russia is attacking civilians. (The brother later told Loshak that he was disgusted with the film.) A husband and wife live in the same apartment in separate rooms, fighting over their opposing views of the war. One pensioner criticises Putin but supports the war because “America wants to destroy both Ukraine and Russia.” The documentary movingly captures the anguish of these divisions. Love pokes through the frustration and the anger. One mother is concerned that her daughter will end up living far away, in the West, because she hates the government. Another worries that her daughter will come to harm – “she was always such a rebel” – and keeps in touch even though the rest of the family won’t. Loshak had wanted an upbeat ending. During filming he’d been heartened when one subject, a psychologist called Natasha, thought she was having some success persuading her mother to question her unswerving support of Putin by using methods for rescuing people from cults. Then Loshak talked to the mother, who said, “Oh, she’s trying to work on me, but I am not convinced at all.” And change is hard to enact from a distance. “I managed to shoot this film remotely, but I don’t think I can do a project about Russians in Russia again in this way,” said Loshak. “I am a reporter, a documentary-maker. I work in the field. Now I am separated from my field and it’s difficult.” The experience of Russians in exile is nothing new. White Russians fled in the aftermath of the Bolshevik revolution. Dissidents were expelled during the reigns of Stalin and his successors. I asked Loshak if he looked up to any former exiles, thinking of novelists such as Alexander Solzhenitsyn and Vladimir Nabokov. Loshak stared at the sky for a moment. “The truth is that I have not realised what has happened, the horror of the situation,” he said. “It is still too fresh. It happened in this way when my father died. Only three months after he was gone did I understand that I would never be able to talk to him again.” He added: “Cutting ties with your country is like a death. I hope it is not irreversible.” ■ Wendell Steavenson has reported on post-Soviet Georgia, the Iraq war and the Egyptian revolution. You can read her previous dispatches from the war in Ukraine for 1843 magazine, and the rest of our coverage, here. PHOTOGRAPHS JUSTYNA MIELNIKIEWICZ