Recent presidential elections in Kenya have followed a painful pattern. After taking an age to count the vote, the commission overseeing it announces that Raila Odinga, doyen of the opposition, has been beaten into second place. Mr Odinga then complains he has been robbed and challenges the result either in the courts or on the street. Much of this script has been retained this time round. On August 15th, the commission’s chairman announced that William Ruto, the deputy president, had been elected to the top job. Mr Odinga suffered his fourth defeat in a row. Amid a turnout of 65%, Mr Ruto got just over 50% of the votes to Mr Odinga’s 49%. There had been hopes that the usual narrative would be dispensed with this time. Alas, shortly before the head of the electoral commission declared Mr Ruto the winner, four of the seven members of the body dissented, deeming the process to have been too “opaque”. Mr Odinga is thus almost certain to challenge the result in court once again. The risk of widespread violence, as has occurred after previous disputed elections, has grown. Despite the messy finale, however, electoral officials appear neither to have bungled the count nor winked at largescale rigging. Electronic results from more than 46,000 polling stations were uploaded for all to see and scrutinise within hours of the polls closing on August 9th. At the previous election, in 2017, the electoral count was so botched that the supreme court upheld Mr Odinga’s complaint, although he then boycotted the rerun the judges ordered. It is too soon to predict how the courts will respond this time. There is a fair chance that they will uphold the result. The four dissenting commissioners were appointed by the outgoing president, Uhuru Kenyatta, who vigorously backed Mr Odinga. If the courts retain their independence as before, Mr Ruto is likely to become the next president. Moreover, the transparency of the count may help limit unrest, at least outside Mr Odinga’s strongholds in western Kenya. Political apathy may also help douse passions. Mr Odinga has spent most of his working life as an opposition firebrand. This time, however, he ran as the establishment’s candidate after making up with Mr Kenyatta and winning the endorsement of his former foe. With his reformist image tarnished by this co-option, Mr Odinga, who is 77, may find it harder to raise hell. Even some of his own Luo people have whispered that he may have had his day. Provided that the last-minute row within the electoral commission does not lead to mayhem, Kenya should still be able to burnish its claim to be one of Africa’s best-functioning democracies. Mr Kenyatta is the third president in a row to respect constitutional term limits, making him a rarity on the continent. None of Kenya’s neighbours can match its history of holding competitive elections. Only one outgoing Kenyan president has managed to get his favoured successor to replace him. It is therefore an irony that the man who could pose the greatest threat to this progress is Kenya’s new president. Mr Ruto, presuming he is confirmed in power, may prove a capable leader. He is a formidable, hard-working and eloquent politician with a prodigious ability to organise and inspire. But he also has the whiff of the strongman about him. “He will make the trains run on time, both in the good sense and the bad,” says a seasoned analyst. His past inspires little confidence. He got his start in a thuggish outfit that helped return Daniel arap Moi, Kenya’s second president, to office in 1992 by intimidating opponents and bribing voters. So much cash was doled out that it helped trigger the worst inflation in Kenya’s history. For the next decade he served as a shadowy bruiser, gaining a reputation as one of the most feared men in the country. Worse was to come. A disputed election in 2007 unleashed the worst political violence since independence. Mr Ruto, who by then had positioned himself as the kingpin of Mr Moi’s Kalenjin tribal federation, was charged by the International Criminal Court (icc) at The Hague with helping to instigate violent clashes that killed more than 1,300 people. The court later suspended the case but, noting allegations that witnesses had been intimidated, pointedly declined to acquit Mr Ruto. He has also been dogged by allegations of corruption ever since taking high office, first as a cabinet minister and then, from 2013, as deputy president to Mr Kenyatta. Mr Ruto denies everything. His past aside, there is much about Mr Ruto that is redolent of populist strongmen elsewhere in the world. Like India’s Narendra Modi, who once sold tea for a living, he makes much of how he used to flog chicken to lorry drivers to make ends meet. Like Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro he has forged a coalition that combines liberal economists with thuggish types. His running mate has been charged with corruption; three political allies are being investigated on murder charges. Yet like Vladimir Putin in his early days in power, he has charmed some Western diplomats, politicians and journalists. By presenting himself as the voice of the poor Mr Ruto has at least partially transcended ethnicity to become the first leading Kenyan politician to win support based more on class than on tribe. Though Mr Odinga was stridently endorsed by the outgoing president, who hails from the most prominent family of the country’s biggest ethnic group, the Kikuyu, most Kikuyus plainly plumped for Mr Ruto. Pre-election opinion polls showed that his greatest support was among those with the lowest incomes. Mr Ruto played energetically to this gallery. Dynasts like Mr Kenyatta (with whom he fell out) and Mr Odinga, sons of Kenya’s first president and vice-president respectively, were responsible for Kenya’s inequality and corruption, he told them. And who better to take them on than someone who had once been a poor nobody himself. But Mr Ruto’s political outlook is changeable, to say the least. Just as he has promised to drain the political and dynastic swamp he has cheerfully inhabited for the past 30 years, he also pledges to defend Kenya’s progressive constitution of 2010, despite having led the campaign against its adoption. Poor Kenyans are unused to someone who speaks so clearly for them. That Mr Ruto is vastly rich only adds to his appeal as a self-made man. If he has a ruthless streak, many think, so much the better. “Kenya needs a strong leader,” said Njoki Maina, a kiosk operator, after casting her ballot for Mr Ruto. Senior Kenyan journalists say that some of the most disturbing pressure they have experienced in the past ten years has come from Mr Ruto’s office. Seeing that his coalition seems to have won the largest number of seats in both houses of parliament, Kenya’s civil society is already crossing its fingers that the new president accepts constitutional restraints. It will be essential that the opposition hold him to account with zeal. Mr Odinga once filled that role. But his much publicised handshake with Mr Kenyatta in 2018 took the sting out of Kenya’s opposition. It will also be vital that human-rights campaigners rediscover their voice to protect the constitution, should it come under attack. Mr Ruto faces challenges, too. The poor will have high expectations. He promises to abandon the profligacy of the Kenyatta years by eschewing expensive vanity projects funded by China. Instead he has said he would lend to poor farmers and small businesses. As food prices soar and a debt crisis looms, he may find this hard. But whatever the difficulties ahead, Mr Ruto’s victory suggests the era of the tribal kingpins who have dominated Kenyan politics for the past three decades may be passing into history. Mr Odinga is unlikely to contest the next election. Mr Kenyatta did not try to groom a Kikuyu heir. The election disputes and economic challenges may look familiar, but Kenyan politics is changing. ■