There was a time when newspaper articles about Neil Gaiman would start with a long-winded explanation of who this odd English chap was, and why readers ought to consider picking up “The Sandman”, his epic comic-book series. In 2008, a dozen years after the original run of “The Sandman” had come to an end and millions of copies had been sold, after even the publication of several unrelated bestselling novels, including “American Gods” and “Neverwhere”, the Times contrived to name Mr Gaiman “the most famous writer you’ve never heard of”. By last month the British papers were singing a different tune: the Guardian called him “one of the most recognised living authors”. What changed? For one thing, people got smartphones and joined social networks, and Mr Gaiman got big on Twitter (he now has almost 3m followers, up from an already staggering 1.5m in 2010). For another, many of his works were adapted for film or television, including “Good Omens” (written in collaboration with Terry Pratchett) and “American Gods”. The people who are still unfamiliar with Mr Gaiman’s work may as well enjoy their last few hours of ignorance. On August 5th Netflix released ten episodes of “The Sandman”. Expect blanket coverage. And great reviews, for Netflix’s adaptation of “The Sandman” is magnificent. The show revolves around a character known variously as Dream, Morpheus or the Sandman. He is one of seven “Endless”, anthropomorphic personifications of certain facets of the human condition: Destiny, Death, Dream, Destruction, Desire, Despair and Delirium. They have been around longer than all the gods and will outlast them, too. Over 75 issues from 1988 to 1996 the graphic novel—as comic books intended for adults came to be called—immersed readers in a finely textured, intricately plotted universe in which the supernatural existed alongside the corporeal. The first six episodes of Netflix’s show follow the initial eight-issue story arc of the comics, in which Dream is captured by humans in an occult ritual and held captive for 70 years before escaping and recouping his crumbling kingdom. To do this he must track down errant nightmares, corral an escapee from a mental asylum and literally travel to hell and back, accompanied by a faithful raven. It is an unlikely conceit for a mainstream, big-budget screen adaptation. Which is one reason why, for more than two decades, attempts to turn it into a film failed. But the other explanation for the long gestation period is that “The Sandman” needed to wait for the real world to catch up. It is only with the advent of streaming services willing to plough colossal sums of money into feature-film-quality series that a comic book like “The Sandman”, by definition episodic, could be satisfactorily turned into an audiovisual extravaganza. Indeed Eric Heisserer, the screenwriter working on the last failed adaptation, came to that very conclusion in 2016: “The best version of this property exists as an HBO series or limited series, not as a feature film, not even as a trilogy”. It has been worth the wait. The show is remarkably faithful to the original graphic novel, to the extent of devoting an entire hour-long episode to the comic’s most horrifying early set piece. “The Sandman” drifted away from horror and settled more comfortably in the realm of magic realism in later issues, and no doubt the show will do the same. Yet it is not just fidelity to the original that makes the adaptation so watchable—Netflix is surely hoping to attract viewers who have never read the tales—but the producers’ skill at making a fantastical world appear believable. In this it is helped, no doubt, by the rich visuals of the graphic novel, and also by the original story’s characters. Where there are trans characters in the show it is because they were there in the comic, not because they have been shoehorned in. For old fans surprised to see black actors inhabiting characters not written as such, the only response can be that if skin colour violates their suspension of disbelief, they might need to reconsider their imaginative faculties. (That said, the producers’ focus on representing American minorities over a diverse global cast reveals its own lack of imagination.) The Netflix show is reported to have an eye-watering budget of some $15m per episode, exceeding even the estimated figures for “The Crown” ($13m). Perhaps the money, like the wait, will have been worth it, too. Should “The Sandman” of 2022 find the same fervent fans and have a similar cultural impact on a new generation of viewers as the original did on its readers, Netflix will have on its hands a wealth of material with which to make sequels and spin-offs. The universe imagined by Mr Gaiman is, like the family at the heart of it, endless. For those who dearly love the characters and their stories, a whole new experience awaits. And for those encountering them for the first time, a treat lies in store. ■ “The Sandman” is streaming on Netflix now