You can smell the contest long before you can see it. Acres of slowly smoking meat produce a savoury haze over south-west Tennessee. The 2022 Memphis in May World Championship Barbecue Cooking Contest drew more than 200 teams from around the world to compete for a share of $145,000 in prize money. The event also attracted upwards of 30,000 spectators who were compelled to play Tantalus: they could see glistening whole hogs, smoked until they’re the colour of a desert sunset. They could smell burnished mahogany slabs of ribs and shoulders, blackened by smoke on the outside but juicy within. But they could not taste any of them. Health regulations prevent the public chowing down. That privilege is reserved for teams, their friends and judges. So why come? One answer is the same thing that brings the masses to baseball and football games. People thrill to see the best in the world face off, while imagining that if things had gone a little differently, they would be the ones contending for the top prize. Of course, an out-of-shape 40-something who plays catch in the yard with his kids isn’t going to suit up for the Yankees. But out-of-shape 40-somethings like me abound on the championship barbecue circuit, as fans and cooks alike. Once found mainly in the South and in places with plenty of southern emigrants, like Chicago and St Louis, barbecue has gone mainstream in America. Most big cities have at least one first-rate barbecue restaurant, and cooking meat over fire has become a middle-class spectator sport, complete with televised competitions. The gladiators of the glaze in Memphis have spent thousands of dollars and hundreds of weekends honing their craft by cooking tons of pork and beef – and given the number of participants and amount of prep, it certainly is tons – all for the chance to lay out more money in order to place a distant tenth or hundreth, as every team but a few will. Part of the allure is the end product. Poach fish perfectly and you get poached fish, but smoke a rack of ribs or a whole hog perfectly, and you get poetry in edible form. The unhurried simplicity of barbecue – which in America means cooking large cuts of meat for a long time over a low fire, as opposed to searing steak or burgers over gas or coals, which is called grilling – belies a complex process that rewards attention and punishes overconfidence. No matter how many pork shoulders, briskets or slabs of ribs a barbecuer has cooked, each time is a little different. A shoulder is fattier or leaner, the weather more or less windy, the fire raging or stubborn. Every change in circumstance requires an adjustment, which means a good barbecuer has to know what he is doing (and usually it is a man), yet not be too cocky. He has to know when to stick to trusted methods and when to improvise. Barbecuing also offers the same sort of meditative pleasure as golf or sailing, with long stretches of relaxed observation interspersed with crucial moments of action, along with camaraderie. It’s done for a group. For the backyard chef that means a group you know or would like to know. You can’t barbecue a single rib or chicken leg; barbecuers cook for a crowd. The teams in Memphis seemed to relish one another’s company, notwithstanding the American food writer Calvin Trillin’s theory that a good barbecue man must have a streak of misanthropy to spend so much time in solitude, quietly tending a fire. I talked to Guy Proctor, from the team Give the Devil His Cue, outside his immense tent. Proctor was a broad, sandy-haired guy, with the cordial-but-not-quite-friendly, sizing-you-up reserve that rural white guys seem to cultivate. “We’re a bunch of buddies from Arkansas,” he said, drinking a beer from a Red Solo cup. “We’ve been doing this for 11, 12 years…just to get away and have a few drinks, that sort of thing.” He seemed calm and enviably unruffled in the sweltering heat, but informed me that while today was “just hanging out, catching up, things will get real tomorrow”. His team was competing in the rib category, one of the prestige matches alongside best shoulder and whole hog. The last of these is tacitly acknowledged as the primus inter pares: it’s ferociously difficult to cook a 120kg beast so that the fatty shoulder is ready to serve at the same time as the lean loin. Hanging out and catching up has always been my favourite part of barbecuing. I’ve had a Big Green Egg – a ceramic smoker – for nearly 16 years, and in that time I’ve become a decent though by no means great barbecuer. But I have made some great friends. My barbecuing came into its own when my wife and I moved to Atlanta in 2010 for my job. When we arrived, our older son was 18 months old. Our younger boy was born ten months later. Atlanta is where we stopped being a young couple with a baby attached, and became a family. I made some of my closest friends during more than four years there. The constant exhaustion of caring for young children, cut with the elation and bafflement and sense of being pulled in a million directions, makes you crave support and companionship. This leaves you more open to deep connections than at any other stage of adult life. My friendships with Joel, Paul and Sam were forged standing around a smoker, beers in hand, keeping an eye on the kids. After a while a clutch of us started shopping together, and planning ever more elaborate meals: a whole lamb cooked over an open fire for a friend’s 40th; a whole seasoned goat wrapped in wet burlap and cooked in a deep pit at another guy’s house; an eight-course new year’s dinner that we ate at around 7pm because we knew we’d all be asleep by 10pm. To state the obvious, all my barbecue buddies were men. This is not to say that women can’t or don’t enjoy making or eating barbecue. Our wives liked what we made and, having been to countless barbecue joints across America, I know they’re hardly male-only preserves. But barbecuing has long been coded as male: aesthetically it prizes plainness, so however new a barbecue restaurant might be, it will be decorated to look time-worn and down-home; culinarily it leans on bold, strong flavours and huge cuts of meat. Barbecue gear is the only cookware sold in hardware stores: have you ever seen a film or TV programme in which the person standing over the grill is a mum? The roots of its maleness are probably located in the past, when barbecue required strenuous manual labour, often by slaves: butchering, digging pits, chopping wood. It was hot, unglamorous work. This might sound like hopeless gender stereotyping, especially if it puts women off or makes fathers less likely to teach their daughters than sons to barbecue. (For the record, I have just the two sons, one of whom likes to cook with me, the other has no interest.) But there is good in letting men bond while doing something productive – a task that they can accomplish together without having to look each other in the eye, or directly express their thoughts or feelings. After all, barbecuing isn’t golf, or sailing, or some other expensive hobby that keeps men away from their families. It is done with family, and at the end there’s dinner. Barbecuing can be competitive but doesn’t have to be. Remarkably, it has so far avoided being dragged to one side or the other of the American political divide. White Southerners comprised a disproportionate share of the field in Memphis, yet not a single Trump or Confederate flag flew. Nor did I take part in or overhear a single conversation about politics. That might dismay those who believe that Joe Biden or Donald Trump must be condemned every waking moment, but the truth is America is not going to suddenly purge itself of your political opponents, nor are the scales suddenly going to fall from their eyes. Every friendly interaction between strangers who do not look, talk or vote like each other is a small victory for sanity and civility. Barbecue’s origins are murky and, like much of American culture, probably stem from the mixing of Native, European and African traditions. But as Adrian Miller writes in “Black Smoke: African Americans and the United States of Barbecue”, his magisterial history of African-American barbecue, “A general consensus emerged in the late 19th century that African-American barbecuers made the best and most authentic barbecue.” Miller rightfully laments that long-standing black barbecue restaurants have historically not received as much attention and praise as newer, fancier, white-owned ones. If you’re in the market for the former, I’m especially fond of the pulled pork, so soft it falls apart into pillowiness with the gentlest pressure of a fork, at Archibald and Woodrow’s in Tuscaloosa, Alabama; the sweet, chewy rib tips and hot links at Lem’s on the south side of Chicago; and the orange-sauced, peppery spare ribs at Arthur Bryant’s in Kansas City. Miller also explains that barbecue used to be seen as “hearty, messy, working-class food that was the delicious result of extensive, exhaustive and specialised menial labour”. But the rotating assembly at my place usually consisted of a few journalists, a lawyer or three, a neuroscientist and a tech worker – relatively well-off professionals, in other words. Along the well-worn path of beer and burgers, a high-end barbecue market has emerged, one dedicated to satisfying – I admit this with no small degree of embarrassment – people like me and my friends. My Big Green Egg is a modern, imaginatively engineered version of the earthenware, dome-shaped ovens used in Asia thousands of years ago. They can run to well over $1,000, even though someone who knows what he’s doing can make covetable barbecue over anything: oil drums, old filing cabinets, holes in the ground. And the average Big Green Egg is less than half the price of a high-end Traeger, a smoker that uses little pellets of compressed hardwood, which are stored in a small box attached to the grill and automatically fed into a heat source. Like the Egg, Traegers can cook for extended periods at low or high heat; unlike the Egg, which requires the user to open and shut air valves to control the temperature, a Traeger’s temperature can be digitally set and monitored with an app. This means, as Jeremy Andrus, the company’s boss, said, “You can have the grill tell you exactly when a steak is medium rare. Or if I’m cooking a brisket and I’m on a mountain-bike ride, I can check on it, and when it’s done, set it to a food-safe temperature.” That quote says it all. Mountain bikes and barbecues are not just status symbols; they say something about their owners. Andrus is telling us that the Traeger is easy and convenient, sure, but he also wants us to know that he’s outdoorsy, conscientious and tech-savvy enough to check his brisket (no doubt organic, grass-fed and humanely raised) while biking. The Egg is more laid back. It can be more fiddly to use, but the design is simpler and more elegant, and there are fewer breakable parts. At Memphis in May, Big Green Egg had a VIP area where people who had shelled out $495 could cook and eat. More than one person there told me, between bites of rich-as-fudge tomahawk Wagyu steak, or pork chops so well-marbled they left a delicious hoggy film coating your mouth, that the event was a “bucket-list trip”. A Norwegian-born German named Hemming said he’d been coming over for the contest since 2012. “I just love the process of barbecue. I just love taking the time to fire up my coals and contemplate life.” It is easy to mock barbecue culture, at least the version on display in Memphis, for its excess and the seriousness with which it takes itself. Teams cook entire pork shoulders, enough meat to feed a dozen hungry people, so a single judge can take a bite or two. The costs of competing far exceed the prize money on offer to anyone bar the winning team. Is it, as the kids say, “problematic”? Maybe. I guess my friends and I are too: a bunch of suburban dads standing around a grill, living up to a stereotype. Perhaps we all should eat lentils and think on our many sins. But eventually the coals will die down and go cool, as will we all. If I’ve eaten too well, calcifying my arteries and thickening my midsection a little too much, those are prices worth paying for watching our kids grow from adorable toddlers into gawky teens across a succession of long conversations over one drink too many on warm and lazy summer nights, as smoke gently rises from the barbecue behind us.■ Jon Fasman is a reporter and podcaster for The Economist PHOTOGRAPHS ED KASHI / VII