For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter THE FAMILIAR sounds of war have fallen silent across much of Afghanistan. In the year since the Taliban’s terrifying triumph over the country’s Western-backed government, the rate of violence has dropped sharply. Do not confuse this with peace. The country has grown poor and hungry. Women are the worst off, with few opportunities for work or education. And data on recorded acts of violence by the Taliban show that suicide bombings and airstrikes have given way to more targeted attacks, such as torture and executions (see chart). The new Taliban behave a lot like the old lot, who ruled the country from 1996 to 2001. The group’s capture of Kabul, the capital, on August 15th 2021 was the culmination of a lightning advance through the country. In the year since, attacks against civilians have decreased by more than 50%, according to the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED), an NGO that collects information about political violence. Much of this decrease is in the types of violence typical of a war zone. Reports of drone and air strikes have fallen by 96%. Detonations of landmines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) have declined by 73%; attacks involving shelling and artillery are down by 97%. The violence reported these days is instead more typical of a repressive regime. The morality police are out in force, harassing men who trim their beards and women who are not covered from head to toe. The Taliban are now responsible for most of the violence committed against civilians (other groups, including Islamic State Khorasan Province, were more active before the fall of Kabul). Reported attacks—which include atrocities such as torture and beatings—are 16% lower this month than they were in the year to August 2021, but the share involving the Taliban has more than doubled. They are responsible for 55% of reported violence across the country, up from 24% before they returned to power. They are behind 79% of all abductions and forced disappearances. Nearly 400 civilians have been killed by the new regime since the fall of Kabul. Despite promises of amnesty, targeted violence against former members of Afghanistan’s armed forces, dissidents and journalists has increased significantly. It makes up 89% of all regime-inflicted violence reported by ACLED in the past year. The NGO’s estimates are conservative, so the actual numbers are likely to be even higher. Many more might go unreported. Unsurprisingly, the Taliban’s promises of a better future are ringing hollow. ■