Among his many other enthusiasms, James Lovelock was a passionate walker. His greatest achievement, he often felt, was to have walked in his 80s all 630 miles of England’s south-west coastal path. As a young man he ranged on foot all over the Surrey hills and the Welsh mountains. He loved to be by himself, out of the way, at the edge of things. As often as possible, he lived in remote places: the Wiltshire hills, the rocky shore of western Ireland, or latterly the coast of Dorset, looking out from his coastguard cottage over the long shingle sweep of Chesil Beach. As he walked, he thought. His books, he said, were not written for hard scientists, but for people who, like him, wandered and wondered. After 1965 those wonderings had a single focus: the hypothesis that all living things, and life itself, combined with the physical systems around them to regulate Earth’s chemistry and temperature, thus keeping conditions stable enough for life to carry on. That thought had come to him in a flash of enlightenment, as his best thoughts tended to come—by intuition, not reason. He had been wondering how to find signs of life on planets like Venus and Mars, and reasoned that it was the chemical disequilibrium in the atmosphere of Earth that showed life existed there. There, too, lay the probable proof of self-regulation. This wondrous system seemed to need a name, so he called it Gaia, prompted by the novelist William Golding as they walked together. It was a calculated risk. Gaia, from the Greek goddess of the Earth, had a ring of myth and magic about it, and suggested that the Earth itself was alive. He did not mean that. When his hypothesis appeared as a book in 1979 it contained an apology, more or less, for referring to the system as “she”. The general public, already astonished as he was by the images of a beautiful and apparently fragile Earth seen from space, were fascinated by the idea. But almost all scientists, especially the biologists, dismissed it. It seemed to run against the rules of Darwinian evolution, by which species simply competed to adapt to their surroundings and survive. In the 1980s he replied to that with a computer model called Daisyworld on which, as the star it was orbiting grew hotter, daisies turned from black to white to reflect the brighter rays. This showed evolution as part of self-regulation, and he was very proud of it. “Hard scientists”, however, were still unimpressed. That was not a surprise. He had never been one of them. On paper he was a chartered chemist with a doctorate from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and later at Reading University he accepted a professorship in “cybernetic aeronomy” as an academic flag of convenience. But he began his youthful apprenticeship in lab work in order to learn the craftsmanship of science. It was as a craftsman and an engineer, more than a chemist, that in 1971 he contributed his own home-made gas chromatograph to NASA to analyse the soil on Mars. His ideal, though, was to work alone, as poets and musicians did—as Galileo and Einstein did—often dreaming up inventions in the small hours and modelling them in his head over breakfast. He put on no white coat to go to work in some stifling corporate or government-funded lab. Instead, he donned old clothes and went to a workshop-lab where he had the best hand-tools, a lathe and a milling machine, to make his own equipment. He loved rotating whirligigs and any hint of natural ingenuity, such as a seagull’s twirling of one leg to steer itself in flight. He could be anything, follow any instinct, rather than cleaving like a hidebound academic to dogma and the accepted view. Since inventing was sheer satisfaction (as he had learned from his shopkeeper father, who was ingenious at diy solutions), he never sought to make money from it. Out of hundreds of inventions he personally patented only his best, the Electron Capture Detector (ecd), a palm-size device which could discover trace amounts of ddt, a poison, and cfcs, a marker of air coming from smoggy industrial places. This invention gave him serious credit with environmentalists, but too many Greens, to his dismay, simply hated science and lied about it. To him cfcs, though worldwide, were generally benign. He even appeared as an expert witness for DuPont, before later realising the role of cfcs in depleting the ozone in the atmosphere. That was not his only anti-Green stance. Later he argued strongly for nuclear power as the right way to fight climate change. This was triumphant engineering, part of the hoped-for modernity he had grown up with between the wars as he devoured H.G. Wells in Brixton library. Yes, it left behind radioactive waste. But in the Gaia system all excreted waste, even the industrial sort, was a natural and potentially useful part of the whole. Gaia had even been there first, with the natural uranium reactors built by bacteria over two billion years ago in Oklo, in Gabon. A hypothesis so all-embracing threw up question after question, which he tackled with delight. Two that especially pleased him involved research on ships or by the sea, an element he adored. Part of Gaia was informed by beach strolls in Ireland to measure iodine emissions from strap seaweed. On board the Shackleton in 1971-72 he discovered that sulphur, a necessary element for life that leached from the land to the sea, could find its way back to the land via the atmosphere as cloud-forming chemicals produced by ocean plankton. Such a self-regulating feedback loop was the very essence of Gaia, and came to be accepted wisdom. But not everything helped his hypothesis. Though he believed he was right and found it hard to understand why others didn’t, he was equally convinced that certainty in science was a bad thing. Gaia was a long letter to a love he did not yet know.  Inevitably, the question also arose of Gaia’s future. There was a practical difficulty, that as a lone scientist he had no team of students or collaborators to pursue the hypothesis after him. But a far more urgent problem concerned Gaia itself. The self-regulating system had worked beautifully, with only a few disasters, for three or four billion years. But nothing suggested that this colourful misfit Earth, wet, carbon-based and, more recently, oxygen-rich, could go on for ever. Its warming was now clear to see, and he worried about mankind’s exploitation of three areas in particular, the tropical forests, wetlands and the continental shelves of oceans. He reckoned Gaia had perhaps a billion years left before the pressure of humans became too much, the system fell out of kilter, and Earth became a desert. Yet as an avid reader of science fiction and a believer in progress and promise, he could not be thoroughly gloomy. In “The Novacene” in 2019 he predicted that a new sort of human being could evolve, part carbon-based and part electronic, with hyper-intelligence to do better what humans already did best: collect and process information. He noted that his own body already contained a pacemaker that transmitted and received data to keep his heart steadily beating. Thanks to that, he could continue even as a centenarian to walk two or three miles every day, to the coast or the hills, still wondering each time at what he saw. ■