EVERY THREE and a half minutes, by the Indian government’s reckoning, one of its citizens is killed in a traffic accident. That adds up to 150,000 people a year. But in all likelihood, the carnage is much worse: the World Health Organisation (WHO) thinks there are 300,000 traffic deaths in India a year—more than there are people in Barbados. That is not just a function of India’s enormous population. China has roughly the same number of people, but its authorities count just 58,000 fatalities each year. In fact India, home to just 10% of the world’s registered vehicles, accounts for 22% of traffic deaths, the World Bank estimates, using WHO data. It is a daily massacre, taking place in full public view but provoking little consternation. It is no secret that India’s roads are mayhem. Drivers ignore lane markings; traffic lights are considered merely advisory; pedestrians weave through fast-moving traffic and the main safety measure is the unremitting blasting of the horn. Nor is it just cars. Overloaded lorries, rickety auto-rickshaws, pootling scooters and roaring motorcycles all jostle for space, as do various forms of livestock. On many city streets vendors eat up half the road space while on some older highways it is not uncommon for people to drive on the wrong side of the road. The chaos reflects a structural problem. In the poorest countries there are few vehicles, which move slowly on bad roads. That means relatively few deaths relative to population, even though safety standards may be low. Rich places can afford to invest in safety and have the administrative capacity to enforce strict road rules, with well-equipped (and well-paid) police and the latest technology. Poor but fast-growing countries, in contrast, have lots of vehicles, and even some decent roads, but do not devote much money or attention to safety. It is in such places where traffic fatalities are highest. The lack of investment in safety has three main aspects. The first is the basic infrastructure of roads and cars. Many vehicles are old and lack essentials such as seatbelts, much less airbags. Lots of roads do not have proper markings or crash barriers. Pavements, to keep pedestrians away from traffic, are few and far between. The “fundamental problem”, says Madhav Pai of the World Resources Institute, an American research group, is that the design of roads in many poor countries is modelled on the rich world, where cars and lorries constitute the vast majority of traffic. But in India, motorcycles and scooters account for 70% of vehicles in many cities. They are 30 times more likely to end up in an accident than a car. Yet Indian roads make no effort to accommodate two-wheelers, for example by designating separate lanes for them. A second failing is education. A survey conducted in 2017 suggested that six in ten Indian drivers did not take a driving test to obtain their licence. It has since become more difficult to pay off transport authorities, but that still leaves millions of drivers who got their papers through bribery. In any case, driving tests are often a charade. Worse still, 37% of truck drivers, who are supposed to have specialised skills to pilot their hulking vehicles, admit they had no formal training before getting a licence. The third big deficiency is health care. Once an accident occurs, the injured are far more likely to die than they would be in a rich country. Official estimates suggest that half of those killed could have been saved if they had received medical assistance in time. But emergency services are scarce outside cities. Hospitals lack enough beds for trauma patients. The ratio of doctors to population, less than one for every 1,000 people, is lower than in neighbouring Sri Lanka and Pakistan, let alone Germany or Japan. Poor working-age men are most at risk. They are more likely to be injured and tend not to have health insurance. The standard of care at public hospitals is low, but bills for even basic private treatment can push poor households into penury. In 2019 the World Bank put the annual cost of traffic accidents to the economy, including the lost future output of those killed, at $172bn, or 7.5% of GDP at the time. India’s government is not blind to the scale of the problem. It has set a target of halving the number of road accidents between 2020 and 2030. It has introduced steep fines and prison sentences for common traffic violations, including driving while drunk, underage or without a proper number plate. Those on scooters or motorbikes now risk having their licence suspended if they are caught without a helmet. A Good Samaritan law guarantees that passers-by will not be harassed by police or asked to pay hospital bills if they help victims of accidents. These changes, unfortunately, have yet to yield any results. Two years after the new protections for those offering assistance were introduced, a study found that almost 60% of such people still report being questioned by police. Bare-headed scooter-drivers remain legion, often accompanied by equally unprotected spouses and children riding pillion. Improving roads, health care and drivers’ education will take a generation. But there are much quicker fixes that can start reducing deaths immediately. A little over a decade ago Tamil Nadu, a state at the southern tip of the country, set up a database of road accidents. That allowed the local authorities to set up emergency-care centres near the most dangerous spots, significantly reducing response times after accidents. Thanks in part to those changes, annual road deaths in the state fell by a quarter in the five years before the pandemic. Civil-society groups have pioneered similar approaches. Piyush Tewari started SaveLife Foundation, a road-safety focused non-profit organisation in New Delhi, after his teenage cousin was killed in a hit-and-run accident. The group has identified the most perilous stretches of road and set about collecting detailed information on why crashes occur. Investigators employed by the foundation visit the site of an accident to speak to victims’ families and get hold of CCTV footage. On one 100km stretch between Mumbai and Pune, the two biggest cities in the rich western state of Maharashtra, SaveLife’s researchers identified 3,500 safety shortcomings, and worked with authorities to remedy them. Some changes were as simple as replacing faulty crash barriers or moving decorative flower pots from the curb. Others were more complicated. Ambulances were put on standby on riskier stretches of road. Signage was put up on sharp turns. Sections of road were resurfaced to make cars rumble if drivers doze off and start veering into the curb. The number of deaths on the expressway fell from 151 in 2016 to just 66 in 2020, a number that would have been only slightly higher without the pandemic. The entire effort cost between $18m and $20m. Across-the-board improvements in drivers’ education, infrastructure and health care may take time, but focusing attention on the most deadly spots can save lots of lives quickly. ■