Study the past seven weeks of the political life of Rusty Bowers, and you will understand the current crisis of the Republican Party. On June 21st Mr Bowers, who is the current speaker of the Arizona House of Representatives, testified before the congressional committee investigating the attack on the Capitol on January 6th 2021. He described the intense pressure campaign that Donald Trump and the former president’s legal advisers waged in the aftermath of the 2020 presidential election to help nullify Joe Biden’s narrow election victory in Arizona. Mr Bowers rebuffed them, explaining that “to do what you do would be counter to my oath.” On July 19th the Arizona Republican Party formally censured Mr Bowers, ostensibly for unrelated reasons. Days later, Mr Trump held a rally in the state where he backed the speaker’s primary challenger, David Farnsworth, who has embraced the ex-president’s false claims that the last election was stolen, and called Mr Bowers a “rino coward” (Republican In Name Only). On August 2nd Mr Bowers lost to him by a margin of nearly 30 percentage points. Like other states holding primary elections, Arizona featured pitched battles in the continuing Republican civil war. That is a contest for control between relative moderates, who show only lukewarm support for the former president, and the America First faction, loyalists to Mr Trump in all matters, but above all in championing the myth of the stolen election. Those who condemned the president’s attempt to subvert democracy, such as Mr Bowers, are fast disappearing from contention. It was an excellent election night for the former president’s faction in Arizona, and a disturbing one for those concerned with America’s democratic backsliding. Trump-endorsed candidates won the Republican nomination to be attorney-general, governor and secretary of state (the chief elections officer): the three state-wide officials who would oversee the election held in 2024 should they win on November 8th. Kari Lake looked set to secure the Republican nomination to be governor, despite stiff competition from a moderate who had the backing of the incumbent Republican governor, Doug Ducey, and Mr Trump’s former vice-president, Mike Pence. It is not hard to see why Ms Lake is thought to be a contender to replace Mr Pence on Mr Trump’s ticket if he should, as expected, make another run for the White House. On an election-eve rally in a muggy warehouse bar in Phoenix, Ms Lake whipped up the crowd against “those bastards back there”—the media, of which the former television presenter had been a member for two decades. She pledged to declare the influx of illegal immigrants an invasion. She reminded the crowd that hers was “the party of Lincoln, the party of Ronald Reagan, and the party of our greater president Donald J. Trump”, to thunderous applause. At the same rally Abe Hamadeh, a political neophyte who secured Mr Trump’s endorsement to be state attorney-general, declared that “we all know that our elections have been hijacked; our justice system has been corrupted.” The man who could become Arizona’s chief law-enforcement officer declared that “our border is wide open and it is done intentionally,” and announced that the malign influence of George Soros, a billionaire investor, needed to be rooted out of the state. Perhaps the most hardcore of the bunch is Mark Finchem, a state legislator and leading proponent of the Stop the Steal movement, who attended the January 6th riot (but maintains he did not enter the Capitol). On August 2nd he won his party’s nomination to be secretary of state. Mr Finchem has said that Mr Trump would have won Arizona in 2020 had he been in office. Now he could well be in charge of certifying the 2024 election. Aside from the white cowboy hat he wore on the evening of his primary victory, his most noticeable accessory was on his lapel: a badge of honour emblazoned with the words “DONALD TRUMP 45TH PRESIDENT”. Mr Trump’s war of attrition is working. Although he failed to remove the Georgia Republicans who had certified his election loss there, the former president’s endorsement record in open races without incumbents, as with Arizona, has been highly successful. His rate of victory is close to 80%. Blake Masters, the Trump-approved candidate to be the next senator from the state, also won his primary. A young former technology executive close to Peter Thiel, a tech billionaire, Mr Masters sees himself as part of “a new generation of Republicans…who understand we’re in a culture war”. His populist campaign aims to break up big tech (because of its censorship of conservatives), rein in “critical race theory” and “this perverse gender ideology” in schools, impeach Mr Biden for his dereliction on the southern border, and prosecute Dr Anthony Fauci, a top medical adviser during the covid-19 pandemic. During his campaign Mr Masters also declared that, if he had been in the Capitol on January 6th, he would have objected to the electoral-college votes affirming Mr Biden’s victory. In an otherwise difficult electoral environment, Democrats may find some success in arguing that the Trump-anointed Republicans pose a threat to American democracy. “If they’re able to change the rules and have officials that are acting in concert, it would have been a totally different outcome,” says Katie Hobbs, who won the Democratic nomination for governor in Arizona and whose probable opponent in November will be Ms Lake. Ms Hobbs is the current secretary of state who oversaw the 2020 election. “I know that there was no basis for any of those allegations,” she says. “That’s dangerous: just people repeating the lies because it gets them the votes they need to try to win their races.” An “audit” of the 2.1m ballots cast in Maricopa County (which includes Phoenix) in the 2020 election, pushed through by Arizona Republicans, failed to back up claims of fraud. Yet voters who believe these baseless claims seem undeterred, and the candidates they backed on August 2nd may prevail anyway. The Republicans who do not believe in the Make America Great Again catechism, meanwhile, cannot help but watch with some amount of horror. A member of the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors, Bill Gates—a local-elections official whom fellow Republicans have turned against for not backing their fraud claims—describes the outcome of his party’s primary as “a nightmare scenario for me”. The chances that the next elections held in the state will be free and fair have diminished. “The rule of law is teetering in this state,” says Mr Gates. “I do not think that is hyperbole to say if these people are elected.” ■