ENGLAND’S FOOTBALLING women ended the country’s long trophy drought with victory over Germany in the final of Euro 2022 on July 31st. But the focus will quickly switch back to the men’s game when the Premier League returns on August 5th. The competition is widely believed to be the most-watched soccer league in the world and is certainly the richest—the clubs’ combined revenues are around £5bn ($6bn). The opening match is a London derby between Crystal Palace and Arsenal. Fans of the Gunners will be nervous. In last season’s opener their team was beaten by another less well-heeled London club, newly promoted Brentford. But perhaps the most eagerly anticipated game of the first weekend will come on Sunday, August 7th, when West Ham United take on last season’s champions, Manchester City. For a winning team, City’s squad has undergone a surprising number of changes over the summer. The headline acquisition is Erling Haaland, a young Norwegian striker, at a reported total cost of more than £85m. At his previous club, Borussia Dortmund, he was the German Bundesliga’s player of the year and top scorer in Europe’s Champions League in 2020-21. The champions have also added Kalvin Phillips, a holding midfielder from Leeds United, who played a key role in England’s run to the final of the Euros in 2021. However, City’s ranks have been depleted by the transfer of Gabriel Jesus and Oleksandr Zinchenko to Arsenal and Raheem Sterling to Chelsea. Of course, the team retains such superstars as Kevin de Bruyne, Riyad Mahrez and Jack Grealish. But opponents can still hope that the new squad will take time to settle down, especially as the addition of Mr Haaland will require a change in the team’s formation. In the Community Shield, the traditional curtain-raiser to the season, held on July 30th, City were outplayed by Liverpool, who were close runners-up last term as well as winners of the FA Cup. Manchester’s other team begin the season with yet another new manager, Erik ten Hag, after finishing a disappointing sixth in 2021-22. Since the second world war, United have had two great managers, Matt Busby and Alex Ferguson, whose long, trophy-laden tenures were followed by long periods of lean rewards (1971-86 and 2013 to date). Mr ten Hag has shored up United’s defence with two new recruits, Lisandro Martinez and Tyrell Malacia, and the team will also benefit from the arrival of Christian Eriksen, who revived Brentford last season after his return from heart surgery. But a top-four place—and consequent qualification for the Champions League—looks the most realistic goal. A couple of factors will make the 2022-23 season unusual. There will be a mid-season break to allow for the World Cup, which is being held in Qatar. The last round of games will take place on November 12th and 13th with the schedule not resuming until December 26th. And a new rule changes the number of potential substitutions from three to five. That will bring football a bit closer to rugby union, where teams are allowed to replace eight players (out of 15) as well as make temporary substitutions for head and blood injuries. In rugby replacements are often needed in the forwards, who take a lot of punishment scrapping with their bulky opponents. The risk, however, is that wholesale team changes can disrupt a team’s playing style as well as enhance it. Many suspect that the rule change in football will favour the clubs with the strongest squads, in a league where the gap between the top few and the strugglers is already wide. Unsurprisingly, bookies make Manchester City the clear favourites to retain their Premier League title, followed by Liverpool. Then comes daylight. The next most fancied teams—Tottenham Hotspur and Chelsea—are quoted at 12 to 1 and 16 to 1 respectively. The chances of an underdog winning the title cannot be ruled out completely; after all, Leicester City managed it in 2015-16. But it seems very unlikely. Aside from Leicester, only five clubs have won the title since Blackburn Rovers triumphed in 1994-95 (Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool and the two Manchester clubs). Romantics might note the last newly promoted team to win the title were Nottingham Forest, who took the old First Division by storm in 1977-78—and that Brian Clough’s upstarts went on to be European champions twice. This year Forest are again among the new arrivals. But bookies are not in the least sentimental. They are offering as much as 1,000 to 1 against Forest repeating the trick of 45 years ago. In fact they make them one of the three favourites to be relegated. ■