IN THE OUTPOURING of grief after the death of Princess Diana in 1997, the British public left so many bouquets outside Buckingham Palace that the Mall resembled a display at the Chelsea Flower Show. By contrast the tributes left to Shane Warne, the Australian cricketer who died unexpectedly aged just 52 on March 4th, look more like the end of a bad night out. But they reflect the fondness with which Australians regarded Warnie. Alongside the flowers and cards placed next to his statue outside the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG) were cans of Victoria Bitter, baked beans and meat pies. As well as being the finest bowler of his generation, Mr Warne was known for partying (though he enjoyed a vodka and Red Bull as much as a beer). The beans are a nod to his refusal to eat the local fare on tour in India in 1998, when Heinz sent a pallet of their tinned finest instead. How a country remembers its athletes says a lot about its relationship with sport. Alongside the tributes from fans, Mr Warne will receive a state memorial service in his home of Victoria (after a private one for his family). Such an honour is difficult to imagine in more buttoned-up cultures. In Britain, which shares its monarchy with Australia but cannot quite match its former colony’s adoration of sport, no commoner has received a state funeral since Winston Churchill in 1965. (Margaret Thatcher, another prime minister, declined one.) It is unthinkable that a sports star would get the treatment. In Australia state premiers have often honoured athletes, as well as entertainers, campaigners and public servants (federal accolades are rare.) Other recipients include Jim Stynes, an Aussie-rules football player, and Lionel Rose, the first indigenous Australian to win a boxing world title. It is uncommon to treat athletes with such reverence. The few examples from elsewhere are some of sport’s most fabled figures. When Babe Ruth, the baseball player whose thunderous hitting turned New York’s Yankees into champions, died in 1948, aged 53, his body lay in state in the stadium for two days like the Lenin of the batter’s box. Around 77,000 people filed past; thousands more crowded outside St Patrick’s Cathedral in Manhattan to mark his requiem. A memorial for Kobe Bryant, a retired LA Lakers basketball star killed in a helicopter crash in 2020, at only 41, was attended by 20,000 people (80,000 applied for tickets). And when Diego Maradona, possibly the best footballer to have ever played, died aged 60 in the same year, Argentina’s government declared three days of national mourning. His coffin lay in state in the presidential palace in Buenos Aires. Feelings ran so high that distraught fans clashed with police when they tried to close the doors before all the mourners had paid their respects. Other athletes have been lionised after dying in their prime. Ayrton Senna’s death at the wheel of a Formula One car in 1994 was a national tragedy in his home country of Brazil. As with Maradona and Argentina’s government, Brazil declared three days of mourning. As many as 3m people lined the streets of São Paulo for his funeral, equivalent to a fifth of the city’s population. Similar grief erupted when the entire Zambian national football team died in a plane crash on the way to a World Cup qualifier in 1993. The area they are buried in, close to Independence Stadium in Lusaka, became known as Heroes’ Acre. (In 2006 the government banned further mourning of the players and decreed that future commemorations should be more cheerful.) Mr Warne hung up his whites long ago, but his death in middle age still came as a shock. Australian cricket fans, who for a long time had a reputation for rowdiness, used to react to his sporting triumphs wildly. As a player, Mr Warne embodied this unruly nature. But he respected the game too. In 1999, in a match between England and Australia at the MCG, the crowd was so disorderly that it stopped play. Mr Warne was sent onto the pitch to reason with them. To the amusement of many in the stands, he donned a helmet to do so. His official send-off will take place on March 30th in the same stadium, and is sure to be a more tranquil affair. But just as when he was barrelling towards the crease, millions of Australians will be watching. To see how highly a nation regards its sportsmen and women, look not at how it celebrates their victories, but how it remembers them when they’re gone.