“KEEP POLITICS out of sport” is an enduring, and much ignored, slogan. Countries and their citizens take pride in the achievements of their athletes and go out of their way to encourage and subsidise their successes. When countries face each other in team sports, supporters wave their national flags, noisily sing their national anthems and frequently boo the opposing side’s players. When nationalism is so strong, politics cannot be far behind. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has already had sporting implications. The final of the UEFA Champions League, European club football’s biggest prize, has been moved from St Petersburg to Paris. Roman Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea, current holders of that title, has said that he will sell the club, presumably anticipating possible sanctions against him. (The oligarch, who has denied being closely linked to the Russian government, says he will donate the “net proceeds” of the sale to “all victims of the war”.) On February 28th, after the Czech, Polish and Swedish football associations refused to play Russia in play-offs for the World Cup in Qatar, FIFA, the sport’s global governing body, suspended Russia’s national teams from international competitions. The men will no longer be able to qualify for Qatar and the women are out of the 2022 Euro championships. And on March 3rd the International Paralympic Committee, facing boycotts from other countries, banned Russian and Belarusian athletes from the Winter Paralympics now getting under way in Beijing. (Only a day earlier the IPC had said merely that the two teams would have to compete as “neutrals” and not be included in the medal table.) The signs that politics would be closely entwined with sport emerged in the 1930s. Adolf Hitler viewed the Berlin Olympics of 1936 as a chance to advertise the strengths of his regime. Some nations briefly considered whether to boycott the event, but none eventually did. At least the four gold medals won by America’s Jesse Owens, a black sprinter and long-jumper, did undermine Hitler’s claims of “Aryan” racial superiority. Earlier, the 1934 British Empire Games (a forerunner of the modern Commonwealth Games) were moved to London on concerns about how South Africa, the scheduled host, would treat non-white athletes. South Africa’s apartheid regime led to the country being excluded from the Olympics from 1964 onwards and boycotts were sporadically enforced in other sports, notably cricket and football (see table). In 1968 England’s cricket team was banned from South Africa after the non-white (and South African-born) Basil D’Oliveira was selected. Two years later a South African tour of England was cancelled in the face of protests. South Africa would not play another official international match until 1991. These boycotts could be justified on the principle that, since South Africa segregated the races in sport as well as elsewhere, not all athletes were treated equally. But the next big wave of boycotts was prompted by government actions that had no conceivable sporting link. In 1980 more than 60 countries, including America, Canada, Japan and West Germany, boycotted the Moscow Olympics in protest at the Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan. In 1984 the Soviet Union and many eastern European countries stayed away from the Los Angeles games in retaliation. The Olympic stay-aways had little political effect. Their chief result was that athletes from boycotting nations lost the chance of Olympic glory. In recent years, some athletes have dropped out of international competitions, rather than face Israeli competitors. Again, the consequence is that athletes pay a price for exercising their consciences. But that would have been a tricky precedent to follow in the current circumstances. Had the Czechs, Poles and Swedes dropped out of the World Cup qualifiers, Russia would have gone straight into the tournament without kicking another ball. Back in 1958, Israel won the World Cup qualifying stage for Asia and Africa without playing a match, because other countries refused to play against it. (Oddly, the main beneficiaries of this process were not the Israeli team, but Wales. FIFA decreed that Israel should meet a European team in a play-off before being allowed into the finals. The Welsh, who had finished second in their qualifying group, were chosen, and then beat Israel to reach the finals for the only time so far.) For a moment, it looked as if FIFA, which allowed Russia to stage the World Cup in 2018 even after the annexation of Crimea—and whose president, Giovanni Infantini, has been unashamedly pally with Vladimir Putin—might balk at excluding the country from Qatar. Its first suggestion was to rename the Russian team and play games at neutral venues with no supporters. That was widely condemned as a cop-out. But kicking Russia out creates a precedent that might prove uncomfortable later on. In the past, the athletes from boycotting countries have tended to suffer rather than benefit. In this case, the Czech Republic, Poland and Sweden have one obstacle fewer on their path to the World Cup. It may seem fair enough that Russia is now a sporting pariah like South Africa in the 1970s and 1980s. But it does mean that any Western country in future that decrees “politics should be kept out of sport” will sound hypocritical. And one day Westerners too could find themselves excluded.