One million people attended “Entartete Kunst” (“Degenerate Art”) in its first six weeks in 1937. The exhibition in Munich had been organised by the Nazis using paintings, sculptures and prints confiscated from German museums. At the opening, Adolf Hitler declared war on “cultural decay” and made an example of the 650 works on display, decrying modern art’s “decadence”, “mental disease” and “racial impurity”. A group of artists on another continent sent Hitler a defiant response: “Yahya al-fann al-munhatt”, or, “Long live degenerate art”. This was the title of a manifesto published in December 1938 by Georges Henein, an Egyptian poet and author, and a group of artists, writers and intellectuals based in Cairo. The manifesto’s 37 signatories advocated for art free from state interference and ideology: “We believe that it is mere idiocy and folly to reduce modern art, as some desire, to a fanaticism for any particular religion, race or nation.” The group embraced Surrealism, a global cultural movement of the early 20th century that explored the unconscious mind as a source of psychological truth and social change. Their work is included in a wide-ranging new exhibition at Tate Modern, “Surrealism Beyond Borders”. Styling themselves al-Fann wa-I-Hurriya (“Art and Liberty”), these artists believed Surrealism could help free people’s minds from both the influence of British colonialism and restrictive local customs. The country’s transition from British colonial rule to a monarchy in 1922 was superficial and nationalists were agitated by Britain’s ongoing influence; some responded by establishing the Egyptian Communist Party and the Muslim Brotherhood. For Carine Harmand, assistant curator of international art at Tate Modern, an untitled painting of 1939 by Ramses Younan (pictured top, right) makes a fitting “commentary on the sociopolitical situation of Egypt at the dawn of the second world war”. It depicts the bent and charred body of Nut, the ancient Egyptian goddess of the sky. Art and Liberty were “outspokenly anti-colonial, anti-imperialist and anti-fascist,” explains Ms Harmand. For them, art was not art if it served a monarch, a party or an institution. Though left-leaning, they condemned the totalitarianism of the Soviet Union. They were admirers of Egyptian folklore and crafts, but they rejected nationalist symbols approved by the Egyptian state such as the figure of the strong and heroic peasant. “The Art and Liberty group wanted to produce a counter-narrative to this,” explains Chihab El Khachab, associate professor in visual anthropology at Oxford University. “They were interested in ordinary Egyptians’ lives, but not in deifying anyone.” Besides Henein and Younan, the group included Kamel El Telmissany, Fouad Kamel, Amy Nimr (pictured top, left), Laurent Marcel Salinas and Ikbal El Alaily. They held five exhibitions in downtown Cairo between 1940 and 1945, showcasing their paintings, photographs, photomontages, sculpture and performances. Clare Davies, an associate curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, says these exhibitions “characterised art as a vehicle of liberation”. When the second world war broke out in Europe, the Cairo group illustrated the psychic and social cost of conflict. El Telmissany created dark works such as “Wounds” (1940), which depicts two figures pinned to a tree by their bleeding hands. Samir Rafi painted nightmarish landscapes including “Nudes” (1945), which shows figures entangled in a monstrous swamp. These were at odds with the prevailing artistic trends and were therefore “excluded from nationalist histories of art in Egypt”, says Mr El Khachab, who is a descendant of El Telmissany. The group’s anti-war commitment was matched by their criticism of injustice closer to home. Art and Liberty members published articles in their magazine Al Tatawwur (“Evolution”) discussing the exclusion of Arab women from education and professional life. Using art, journalism and activism, Ms Davies argues that they “forced viewers to confront the brutal psychological and physical toll of the economic and social injustices visited on some of Egypt’s most vulnerable inhabitants”. Inji Efflatoun, one of a handful of the group’s female members, vividly painted the poverty, violence and distress she witnessed in Cairo. Her painting “The Young Girl and the Monster” (1942) depicts a tortured inner world of distorted figures, raging flames and blood-stained clouds. Her feminist activism led to her imprisonment in 1959 under the Nasser regime; she continued to paint in jail. Henein was exiled from Egypt in 1962 for his anti-authoritarian views. The collective maintained that “art has no country”. The show at the Tate may bring the fascinating work of this group to a wider audience. In the wake of the revolution of 2011, Egyptians have been rediscovering it, Mr El Khachab says, as “people are looking for alternatives to nationalism”. Art and Liberty may offer some answers. “Surrealism Beyond Borders” continues at Tate Modern, London, until August 29th