When soo choi opened P21 in Seoul five years ago, she did not have a “grand plan”; she just wanted her gallery to promote local artists. With Frieze, one of the world’s biggest art fairs, opening in South Korea’s capital on September 2nd, she will get the opportunity to do just that. She is showing work by Ryu Sung-sil, a 29-year-old who last year became the youngest artist to win the Hermès Foundation Misulsang, an award worth 20m won ($14,900). Ms Ryu’s edgy installations and performance art are not to everyone’s taste. Laced with dark humour and occasional references to North Korea, her work offers an ambivalent critique of the South’s materialistic society (pictured). Ms Choi acknowledges that her decision to showcase eclectic, intellectually challenging works at Frieze Seoul rather than selling “pretty pictures” might have been too ambitious. Yet an unapologetic glint in her eye suggests she is not too fussed. The daughter of another gallerist, Ms Choi knows her market intimately. “Koreans”, she says, “will only start paying attention when the international community does.” Fortunately thousands of foreign visitors are expected to arrive for the four-day extravaganza that is Frieze Seoul, joining many more local attendees. South Korea has put itself on the map for its food, fashion and k-pop music. Can it do the same with contemporary art? As Frieze’s first art fair in Asia, the inaugural Seoul edition attests to the city’s growing importance in the art market, as well as to the deep pockets of collectors in the region. That is reflected in the line-up: around a third of the more than 110 galleries exhibiting will be Asian. Those with the means can purchase artworks by contemporary artists from around the world, as well as works by Old Masters. Plenty of South Korean artists will be on display, both at Frieze and the Korean International Art Fair (Kiaf), which will be held concurrently in the same building in Seoul’s modish Gangnam district. Though technically independent of one another—with the exception of a series of joint talks—Kiaf has enthusiastically supported Frieze’s arrival in the city. Pat Lee, the director of Frieze Seoul, hopes the fair and the various exhibition openings, parties and other schmoozing opportunities that happen in its orbit will encourage international gallerists and collectors to forge stronger links with the local art scene. That would give South Korean galleries and artists better exposure and enable local collectors to meet art-world types from abroad. “I just want to facilitate the maximum number of conversations,” says Mr Lee, and help “the city to shine”. Some of those doing the talking will be South Korean millennials and Gen-Zs. Well-travelled and savvy, this group emerged during the pandemic as a new generation of collectors. They are looking at art with not just a connoisseur’s eye, but that of an investor: in contrast to Seoul’s bubbly housing market and wobbly stockmarkets, physical art is a more appealing bet. Spying opportunity, several international gallerists have set up shop in Seoul alongside local art dealers. Since Emmanuel Perrotin, a French gallerist, opened a space in South Korea in 2016, a number of Western galleries, including Pace and Thaddeus Ropac have followed suit. Mr Perrotin opened his second Seoul outpost just before Frieze, in Gangnam. Lehmann Maupin, which has galleries in Hong Kong, London and New York, claims South Korea is its biggest market after America. South Korea’s government has also played a part in the industry’s rapid growth by investing heavily in the arts, funding a spate of new museums and offering grants to artists. The government does not levy vat or import duty for many types of art (though photography and furniture are not exempt), nor tax on sales worth less than 60m won ($45,000). This favourable tax environment for collectors goes hand in hand with a relatively stable political one. This appeals to gallerists, artists and fair organisers and is in contrast to the volatile politics of Hong Kong, still Asia’s dominant art centre. Yet it remains to be seen if Seoul can rise to Hong Kong’s level as an Asian hub of the art world, says Brett Gorvy of lgdr, a venture between four gallerists. Though ascendant, South Korea’s art market has a lot of catching up to do. It was the fifth most important market for post-war and contemporary art in 2021. Yet it trails far behind the likes of America and China. Sales in South Korea represented only 2% of the value of sales globally. Those in America accounted for nearly half and in China, almost a quarter. South Korea’s infrastructure must get up to speed too. At the moment the country lacks enough art professionals, ranging from trained curators to specialist logistics operators to run a slick, commercial art ecosystem on the same scale as Hong Kong. Frieze Seoul will be a big test of whether all these elements can come together. Mr Gorvy, for one, is confident the city will rise to the occasion, saying “we’re all betting very strongly on the future of Seoul”. Ms Choi agrees. “There will be ups and downs,” she says, but with “so many talented artists and good shows” she is optimistic that South Korea can become a major player. The presence of one of the world’s most important art fairs is surely a good omen. ■ Frieze Seoul runs from September 2nd-5th at coex