At a hospital in Odessa, ambulance crews were hanging out around the entrance, smoking and chatting with wounded men in wheelchairs. An officer with three stitched-up wounds in his neck, painted livid green with antiseptic, was preparing to go home at last. Days earlier, at the end of July, the Ukrainian government had announced the beginning of its widely trailed counter-offensive in the south towards Kherson, a city 90 miles (145km) east of Odessa. Under the chestnut trees, a soldier paced in the sunlight. An external fixator, a metal frame used for healing broken limbs, protruded from his forearm, and he had a phone cradled to his ear. The confusion of war was clear from his side of the conversation: “There are two of us from the unit here now. Misha, who lost his foot, is from the other platoon. Well, losing your foot is better than the whole leg. I know Valera was shot in the head. Vlad told me he fell over during the fight and a mortar shell landed five metres away, right in front of him but didn’t explode. He says God must have saved his life.” His unit, he continued, didn’t have a clue where they were, where they were going or where the enemy was. “They are all idiots. I don’t have any other word. I am overwhelmed by it all. Fuck. I don’t understand how this is possible. We had no communications, nothing. Then we found a guy with a jeep and he evacuated three of us. One was really bad, he kept losing consciousness. Alexiy says he had terrible headaches and his vision is blurry. He has really bad concussion.” “When I was at the front,” he said, “all I did was to run and shoot, and then run and shoot, and run and shoot.” Earlier I had met Natalya Chigikova, a hospital volunteer, in Odessa’s famous book market. Like the rest of the city, it was subdued without the bustle of summer tourists. News on the war was vague. Reporters had been barred from the front, but Ukrainian forces were said to have breached the first line of the Russian defences in several places. Two ambulance sirens wailed in tandem. “That sound makes my eyelid twitch,” Chigikova said. “I know there are wounded inside.” The day before there had been 50 new arrivals in one of the two hospitals that she visits, she said. Chigikova had her morning face on: no make-up, tattooed eyebrows and plumped lips. She wore red tracksuit bottoms and pink flip-flops, smoked a long, thin cigarette, talked at breakneck speed and laughed at the end of every sentence. Every day she comes to the hospital and hands out underwear and T-shirts, mobile phones and SIM cards, cigarettes and vapes (“good for stress,” she says), wet wipes, sponges, fruit and bottled water. Doctors can prescribe opioids, but otherwise nurses have only aspirin on hand for pain relief, so there’s a lot of demand for over-the-counter painkillers, sedatives, muscle relaxants and anti-inflammatory medication. When things are less frenetic, Chigikova often cooks vats of borscht and brings it in tupperware bowls. A couple of days earlier, the hospital’s blender had broken – staff had been using it to purée food for soldiers who couldn’t eat because of broken jaws. Chigikova brought a new one. Chigikova is a hairdresser in her mid-50s who pole-dances in her spare time. (She showed me a picture of herself in action with a Ukrainian flag draped from her outstretched arm.) She started volunteering when fighting with Russian-backed separatists began in 2014 in Donbas, a region in the east, and continued even after most Ukrainians seemed to want to forget the ongoing conflict. She was adamant that the wounded soldiers still needed support. “I give the soldiers something, but I also get something back. A warmth,” she told me. “It’s like with my clients, after I have made them beautiful and they leave feeling happy.” The uniforms of the wounded, which are bloody and grimy from days at the front, often have to be cut off when soldiers arrive at the hospital. They carry their few possessions in plastic bags, along with scraps of paper with the numbers of their loved ones; often their mobile phones are smashed. “Their first question is usually: ‘Where am I?’” Chigikova told me. She showed me a photo of a soldier who’d been brought in the day before. White bandages were wound tightly around his upper body like a mummy and I could see the stump of his shoulder. Most injured soldiers are in a state of shock. “I introduce myself, but in their minds they are still at the front, and they say, ‘No thank you, we don’t need anything.’ It takes a couple of days for them to warm up.” Sometimes family members visit, but most patients remain in hospital for several weeks without seeing anyone they know. Injured soldiers often find it impossible to pull underwear over their bandages or splints, so Chigikova has designed boxer shorts and vests with Velcro fasteners at the side. She knows a seamstress who runs them up for her. A friend designed a T-shirt with the slogan “Rusnya Pisda”, a profane piece of slang that roughly translates as “Russians Kaput”. Chigikova said the soldiers love them. Chigikova is a link to the outside world. At times she has been part of an organised team of volunteers but these days she is a one-woman band. She prefers not to take donations of second-hand clothes, providing only new ones as a point of pride with money raised on Facebook. A recent post about the soldier who lost his arm yielded over $25,000 in just two days. When we went shopping together to spend the money, Chigikova filled the back of her sky-blue Mini Cooper with supplies. (She bought the car in 2014, “before I imagined I would need a larger boot”.) There were bags of absorbent bed pads, knee pads, Velcro leg braces, rubber shower shoes and piles of clothes, as well as toothpaste and brushes, toe-nail clippers, trainers and a teddy bear: “Sometimes they just need something to cheer them up.” Outside the emergency department, Chigikova told a surgeon who was smoking that she’d brought him the specialised medical textbook he’d asked for. “At last!” said Dr Volodya (he asked me to use a pseudonym because he was speaking without authorisation). He had been learning how to do a particular type of skin graft where a flap of skin is flipped over a wound. He had been trying to work out how to keep the blood supply constant during the procedure. “Thank you!” he said, hugging Chigikova. Across Ukraine, surgeons like Dr Volodya who are accustomed to treating everyday traumas – car crashes, kitchen accidents, falls – have spent the past six months on a crash course in conflict medicine. The Ministry of Health has distributed teaching videos; foreign specialists give lectures online. Some have even visited. War injuries need very different treatment from peacetime ones. The force of the blast from a shell or missile often pushes debris – asphalt, glass grit, soil, wood splinters or shreds of clothing – into a wound, increasing the chance of infection. X-rays show only metal objects, so doctors tend not to sew up wounds immediately, because surgeons often have to excise pockets of infection. Instead, bones are riveted with metal rods and screws that stick out from an arm or leg like scaffolding. After a week or so, when a limb has stabilised and bone and blood vessels are beginning to knit together, surgeons can operate again, inserting pins and plates to fix the bones permanently. In his office, Dr Volodya showed me an X-ray of the ghostly outlines of bones spotted with jagged pieces of shrapnel the size of knuckles. “This is what we are seeing,” he explained. “Lots of small pieces of shrapnel and big ones…Bones we can mend, but muscles and nerves take more time. For example you see an arm that seems to look OK, but the patient may not be able to move his fingers.” Another surgeon poked his head around the door. “Three more coming,” he said to Dr Volodya. “Two crush syndromes and one that needs an amputation.” “Amputations are the most challenging,” said Dr Volodya. “You are supposed to be putting things back together and instead something is taken away. You know what the person’s life will be without his leg or his arm, the challenges he will face.” He dabbed his eyes with a piece of gauze and apologised for his tears. It was just an allergy. “Very few of the wounds we are seeing are made by bullets,” he said. He reckons around 90% are shrapnel. “Talking to the soldiers, they all say, ‘It’s an artillery war.’” Since Russian troops withdrew from Kyiv in early April to focus on the east of Ukraine, they have reverted to Soviet tactics, pulverising everything in their path with artillery shells before attempting to advance with tanks and infantry. In a café in town I met Kostya, a Ukrainian infantry sergeant who was his unit’s drone pilot, recovering from concussion. A blast had shaken his brain so badly that he spent a month in hospital with terrible headaches, blurred vision and loss of balance. At one point, he said, his eyes pointed in two different directions. Over the summer his small unit of about ten soldiers was frequently sent forward for 24 hours at a time, sometimes to within 800 metres of the Russian front lines. Their mission was to observe and respond to any Russian advance. Once, Kostya said, his platoon had taken up a position with nothing but bushes for cover. “We hadn’t dug in. It was raining and then the shelling began. We lay on the ground and shells fell all around us. You could hear the bang of artillery fire, and then the whistle like this”– he made a long, low whistle through his teeth. “You’re just waiting. Then, an explosion. And then you can hear the shrapnel falling all around. We lay on the earth and the shells were landing closer and closer. I was trying to dig into the soil with my flak jacket.” Kostya’s platoon fought in farmland interspersed with woods, using copses and irrigation channels for cover. They dug in and hid themselves with branches for camouflage. The barrages were constant and indiscriminate. “They shelled everywhere because they couldn’t see us.” Every couple of hours there’d be another barrage that would last 30 minutes or more. Russian gunners would aim two shells at a particular point, then another two – calibrated a set distance away from the first – and then fire two more to land in between. It was a kind of dance, Kostya said. If they heard the heavy buzzing sound of Russian drones, everyone kept still because any movement would be visible. On one occasion, Russian troops used incendiary shells to set fire to the undergrowth and flush them out. While he was recovering, Kostya’s unit had been in the vanguard of the counter-offensive. They had taken their objective successfully – “a ten-out-of-ten operation” – but the unit behind them had apparently been hit with artillery. Two men were killed and several injured. Chigikova conducted her rounds of the hospital briskly and cheerily. Ukrainian soldiers are well equipped with body armour and helmets, so most injuries are to limbs. In each room four or five wounded men lay on narrow beds with a horizontal metal pole above so they could pull themselves up. Their bedside tables were piled with plastic trays of apples, bread rolls and bottles of water. Crutches were leaned against the wall; bedpans and portable dialysis machines stood on the floor. One man lay with his back to Chigikova, dozing after surgery and gently palpating his bandaged leg. It was a warm, end-of-summer afternoon and there were plenty of tattoos on display. Patriotic Ukrainian tridents poked past bandages. The soldiers’ ages ranged from 20 to over 50. Chigikova kept up the cheery banter as she swept through the wards: “How are you doing today! Oh you look much better, I can see you do! You are so handsome, I bet all the nurses want to have their picture taken with you.” She handed out painkillers and showed a man with an external fixation scaffold on his thigh how to use the Velcro underwear she had brought with her. “You will feel better after the operation, you will, you’ll see.” “If you say, Natalya,” said the man. “We trust you.” Five newly admitted soldiers sat in silence in the next room. “You’re so self-contained!” said Chigikova, “You don’t say anything!” The men asked her tentatively if they might have some water and cigarettes. “Regular cigarettes or vapes? I’m so proud of you guys,” Chigikova told them. “I’m so proud of you all.” In another room, she greeted a man who’d lost his leg and was suffering from depression. “Hello my suicide man! I’ll give you some cleaning sponges.” The sheet lay flat over the place where the leg had once been. “It’s painful, it’s painful,” he said. Three patients had served in a special-forces unit until they were wounded on the Kherson front a month earlier. I found them full of bravado and jokes. Danylo, who had a big red beard, showed me some photos on his phone: the artillery war in three acts. In the first he posed with his sniper rifle, fighting fit, in front of a captured Russian armoured personnel-carrier. You could see a blackened skeleton in a trench, still with its boots on, alongside a white skull – “One of theirs, don’t worry!” The second photo had been taken while he was being evacuated after shrapnel shredded his knee cap: his legs were tied with cloth at the ankle to stabilise them, his camouflage trousers were ripped open and his hairy leg was smeared with blood. In the third image, taken in hospital, he snapped his shrapnel wounds, red and livid, close up. “Danylo was really badly injured,” said Chigikova, “but he is laughing all the time and his knee is really healing very fast.” ■ Wendell Steavenson has reported on post-Soviet Georgia, the Iraq war and the Egyptian revolution. You can read her previous dispatches from the war in Ukraine for 1843 magazine, and the rest of our coverage, here Portraits IRA LUPU IMAGES: Reuters, Getty