ONCE THERE was a town where Nature’s creatures lived in harmony. The seasons passed; the wilderness bloomed. All was as it should be. Then suddenly, everything changed. “No witchcraft, no enemy action had silenced the rebirth of new life in this stricken world. The people had done it themselves,” wrote Rachel Carson in “Silent Spring”. This fable opens her landmark environmental book, first published in 1962. A marine biologist at America’s Bureau of Fisheries (the predecessor of the Fish and Wildlife Service), Carson (pictured) was concerned about the indiscriminate use of DDT and other pesticides in post-war America. At the time prolific quantities were being used in farming and sprayed on the habitats of the Anopheles mosquito that spreads malaria. Worried about the disastrous side-effects of the chemical that America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention called “the atomic bomb of the insect world”, Carson decided to sound the alarm. She charted the damage wreaked by DDT on ecosystems in North America in meticulous detail, citing numerous studies. After the insecticide was used in British Columbia in 1957, salmon populations in four major rivers were all but wiped out. The impact of DDT on birds was equally devastating. The chemical remained in the environment and moved up the food chain, poisoning birds who gobbled contaminated fish. Reports from around America found that bald eagles were struggling to reproduce. America’s national symbol “seems to be on the verge of extinction”, Carson wrote. Nor was it only fish and fowl that were at risk. DDT was a health threat to humans too, Carson explained. The toxic chemical accumulates in the body and has been linked to cancer and other illnesses. Carson died of cancer less than two years after “Silent Spring” was published. But she left a lasting legacy despite the best efforts of America’s chemical industry to suppress her book and discredit her, both professionally and personally. She was called a “hysterical woman” and “a fanatic defender of the cult of the balance of nature”. The public felt differently. The book was an immediate bestseller; almost a million copies had been sold by the time Carson died in April 1964. This prompted politicians to take action. John F. Kennedy ordered an investigation into her findings, which led to a ban on DDT in America in 1972. Several other countries followed suit. Britain’s Parliament debated her work extensively; Sweden adopted the word “biocid” (biocide) to describe chemicals that kill by poisoning. “Silent Spring” helped kickstart the modern environmental movement that prompted the American government to establish the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 and to pass laws governing air and water quality. Readers were struck by Carson’s passionate defence of the natural world and her fury at humans’ ability to inflict irreparable damage on it. Disrupt these complex, fragile webs of life at your peril, she warned. Sir David Attenborough, a naturalist, describes “Silent Spring” as the book which has most profoundly shaped the scientific world other than “On The Origin of Species”. Al Gore, a former American vice-president, and Rex Weyler, the co-founder of Greenpeace International, trace their activism back to Carson’s work. Her skill lay in her ability to communicate dense, scientific information through vivid, lyrical prose. “As crude a weapon as the cave man’s club, the chemical barrage has been hurled against the fabric of life,” she wrote. Her artful marriage of poetry and science also inspired subsequent generations of authors, including Richard Powers, an American novelist, and Robert Macfarlane, a British nature writer. In “The Year of the Flood”, Margaret Atwood hails Carson’s achievements by turning her into a saint. Sixty years later, Carson’s deep understanding of the “balance of nature” feels more relevant, and urgent, than ever. Beset by floods, typhoons and the suffocating temperatures unleashed by anthropogenic climate change, the world today is more “stricken” than the one Carson wrote about. Her words remain a rousing argument for action in the face of destruction. They show that language and creativity can still cut through the spin and partisan politics that hamper meaningful climate action. Carson ended “Silent Spring” by evoking Robert Frost’s poem, “The Road Not Taken”: “We stand now where two roads diverge,” she wrote. The question is whether humanity has gone too far down one path to ever reach, as the biologist put it, “a destination that assures the preservation of our Earth.” ■