A cartoon of a girl in pigtails encircled by the words “Save the Girl Child, Educate the Girl Child” is a common sight on billboards across India. It is a public-service advertisement for the government’s $85m campaign to correct the country’s skewed sex ratio at birth. Indians tend to prefer having sons to daughters—and to abort female fetuses in chillingly large numbers as a result. Yet the government’s efforts may be bearing fruit. How far has the ratio normalised, and why? The natural sex ratio is around 105 boys per 100 girls. This was roughly the situation in India until the 1980s when prenatal ultrasound became widely available and abortion, which was legalised in 1971, became more widespread. The sex gap duly yawned. According to the 2011 census, India then had a birth ratio of 111 males to 100 females. This was despite longstanding policies to mitigate the problem. Fetal sex determination was outlawed in 1994; the restriction was and is routinely flouted by doctors. Yet a new report from the Pew Research Centre shows that the sex gap has at last begun to normalise. It suggests India’s current sex ratio at birth is 108 males per 100 females. The sheer size of India’s population and the heavy socio-economic costs of a gender imbalance at birth make even such incremental improvements significant. Countries with less gender equality, of which skewed sex ratios are an indicator, are associated with poor economic performance. The gender imbalance also leads to increased rates of violence and crime. A shortage of women means that fewer men get married, which makes them more likely to commit violent crimes than married men. And where that ratio is especially out of whack, the problems are magnified—in Haryana and Punjab, Indian states with the worst sex ratios, illegal trade in poor women from neighbouring states has proliferated. Why the Indian sex gap may now be closing is less clear. The government’s billboards may have played a part. The “Save the Girl Child. Educate the Girl Child” campaign was launched in Haryana in 2015 and concentrated in northern states with highly skewed ratios. Generally higher levels of education, especially among women, may also be helping. Better educated parents tend to be less eager to abort female fetuses. And between 2015 and 2020 the number of Indian women enrolled in higher education increased by almost a fifth. But there is still some way to go for gender parity in the country. Female participation in India’s workforce remains dismally low, at just over a fifth, according to World Bank estimates. Yet there is at least now a prospect of fewer missing girls at birth in India.■