THE POP-CULTURE image of the late 1960s in America as a time of hippies and free love has become overshadowed by the tumult that marred the decade, from assassinations to war to popular discontent. Racial unrest was widespread and profound, with violent clashes between citizens and the police and National Guard. More than 150 riots took place in the summer of 1967 alone; scores of people died and thousands were injured. Some journalists argued that the period was the greatest national crisis since the civil war. The political response was divided. Richard Nixon, who was launching a second presidential campaign, called for a restoration of “law and order” (he was elected the following year). Lyndon Johnson, the Democratic president, set up the Kerner Commission to investigate the causes of the discontent. The resulting report argued that “our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal”; its recommendations included funding for housing, education and fair policing in poor urban areas; recognition of entrenched racism in the country; even a “national system of income supplementation”. Few of those policies were enacted. “The only thing that was implemented from its recommendations…was the funding towards police training,” says Sierra Pettengill, the director of a new documentary, “Riotsville, USA”. Her film looks at one way that money was spent: on the construction of a handful of ersatz towns in which soldiers could practise riot response. These training grounds were built by the army to resemble an average Main Street; soldiers dressed as civilians caused havoc in specially designed “agitator” scenarios. Ms Pettengill has drawn exclusively on archival footage from broadcast and government sources. “Riotsville, USA” opens with eerie imagery of one artificial town. The camera pans over an empty street with generic storefronts (“Corner Drugs”, “Fashion Shop”) before revealing two overturned cars—props for the play-acting that will unfold. It is a kind of movie set, where the story is always the same: rioters start a ruckus, and officers march in formation to shut them down and round up the “radicals”. The director supplements this with rarely seen clips offering insight into the atmosphere in America in the late 1960s, thereby contrasting the vision of control and security represented by the training towns with the possibility of social change in the air. Instead of showing fires burning in Detroit and Newark, where the most destructive unrest took place in 1967, Ms Pettengill includes video from a televised forum in which people from different cities shared their experiences and hopes for progress. The impact of the assassination of Martin Luther King in April 1968 is conveyed via a clip of Jimmy Collier and Frederick Douglass Kirkpatrick, two musicians and civil-rights activists, performing a tremendously moving folk song called “Burn, Baby, Burn”. “One of the earliest goals [of this film] was not to show any footage that felt familiar,” Ms Pettengill says, in order to encourage the viewer to think about the much-mythologised era in a new way. Not that the footage of the training centres was completely unknown: Ms Pettengill found journalistic reports from the time and then the relevant records in the National Archives. But the film-makers argue that there has been a wilful amnesia in America about the era and its difficulties. “What we were interested in was the fact that this footage was in a sense an open secret,” says Tobi Haslett, an essayist who wrote the film’s script. The techniques practised in these model towns reflected a professionalisation of the police response to protest and unrest, an approach that was soon implemented. The film’s climactic sequences show how tear gas, alongside other methods of crowd control, were used on civilians after a demonstration turned violent in Liberty City, Florida, in August 1968. (The Republican National Convention was taking place a few miles away, in Miami Beach, at the time.) The era was key, the film argues, to the militarisation of police personnel and equipment. It is a period with similarities to the present day, though Ms Pettengill began work on the documentary before the demonstrations held in the wake of the murder of George Floyd in 2020. Today there are plans, drawn up by local governments, for expensive new police facilities similar to those constructed 50 years ago. “There’s a proposed Riotsville outside Atlanta and one in Chicago,” Ms Pettengill says. “The one in Atlanta is called ‘Cop City’.” The unsettling archival footage in “Riotsville, USA” might draw attention to moments in history long past—but it can also feel like a prophecy. “Riotsville, USA” is playing in American cinemas now