For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter BORIS JOHNSON, Britain’s departing prime minister, will bequeath his successor a fraying and fractious country. An analysis by The Economist of polling and economic statistics since the 1970s reveals that Liz Truss, the favourite for the job, or Rishi Sunak, her rival, will come to office next week in one of the most testing political landscapes in modern times (see chart). Domestic energy bills are set to rise to eye-watering levels in October, leaving many Britons struggling to pay them. The annual consumer-price inflation rate reached 10.1% in July, while real wages are falling at the fastest rate in 20 years. The Bank of England has been raising interest rates at the fastest pace since 1990, pushing up the cost of taking out a mortgage. And although unemployment is low, many economists expect a recession, perhaps lasting a year or more, to begin soon. How will this affect the new prime minister’s prospects? The mounting stack of economic problems marked “urgent” in the new leader’s in-tray also means political trouble. The governing Conservative Party trails Labour, the main opposition, by ten percentage points, the biggest deficit since polling records began in 1970. Our analysis suggests that about one fifth of the polling gap between the party in power and the opposition can be explained by changes in economic fundamentals. For example, every one-percentage-point decline in real wages is associated with the governing party losing a percentage point in polling. Just 160,000 members of the Tory party will have chosen the new prime minister—not the wider British electorate. Ms Truss or Mr Sunak will be the sixth prime minister out of the past 11 (since Edward Heath) to enter 10 Downing Street without having won a general election. She or he could call a snap election in order to give the Tories a fresh electoral mandate and to create distance from Mr Johnson’s chaotic regime. But the current climate does not favour going to the ballot box. Martin Baxter, who runs Electoral Calculus, a political consultancy, thinks Labour would win a 111-seat majority if votes were cast tomorrow. The new Tory PM may, quite sensibly, decide to hang on until her or his electoral term ends—a general election is not required until January 2025 at the latest. The Tories’ deficit in the polls could even widen as the reality of rising energy bills becomes more painful. We estimate that if the Bank of England’s gloomy economic forecasts prove correct, the Tories will be 15 percentage points behind Labour in the polls by next autumn. At that point the electoral prospects for the prime minister would be dire. The Tories came to office in 2010 promising to fix Britain’s economy. Twelve years on, it still needs mending. ■