Under an official media blackout, getting information about Ukraine’s counter-offensive in the south of the country is not easy. A military press officer is blunt. “I have permission to tell you what’s written on our Facebook page and no more.” Unsurprisingly, hostile sources have tried to fill the vacuum. In recent days Russian news sites have peddled the idea that Ukraine’s southern push has failed, at a vast cost in lives. Mykolaiv, the city closest to the frontline, has witnessed the worst of it, they claim, with overflowing morgues and hospitals struggling to treat the massed ranks of wounded. A visit to the city on September 3rd showed those claims to be untrue. Long queues outside blood-donation clinics did suggest a degree of local trepidation. But there was no panic at any of the city’s morgues. The city’s hospitals are closed to the press: a Russian missile strike near one of them overnight offered clues as to why. But a doctor working at the main emergency unit said he was seeing between 15-30 injured soldiers a day. “More than usual, but not our worst nightmare.” On August 29th Ukraine announced the start of a counter-offensive to take back Kherson, a key region in the south of the country. Its forces are pressing at several points along a 150-mile (241km) frontline. The stakes are high. Success would help secure Ukraine’s Black Sea coast, and thus its ability to import and export by sea. A failed operation would put huge strains on the country’s leaders, especially if large numbers of Ukrainians were to die. Reports suggest that Ukraine has taken a modest amount of territory in an area north-east of Kherson city. It is unclear at what cost. Andriy Zholob, a surgeon working at a field hospital 10km from the front, says his work has increased since the start of the counter-offensive. But there has been “no tragedy”. Most incoming patients have concussion-related injuries, thanks to Russia’s artillery superiority. There have been a “few” blast injuries, he says: “fractures, missing hands”. But the worst job of the week was a consequence of a battle fought before the counter-offensive. “We had to remove bodies that had been lying in the field for ten days. It’s hard to explain what happens to the body of a young man when the flies and August sun get to him.” Many of the roughly 200,000 people (40% of the pre-war population) who have remained in Mykolaiv know all too well. A few are already expert morticians. Nelly Yarovenko, an accountant before the war, is in charge of dealing with the fallen. She accompanies soldiers’ bodies from battleground to underground—in Mykolaiv or beyond. She knows every detail of the process, from the documents needed to ensure families get compensation to the way the Ukrainian flag should be draped across the lid of coffins. It is not a job suited to the emotionally delicate. “I suppose my character suited the task,” she says. Ms Yarovenko insists that the number of funerals, running at around a dozen a week since the end of March, has not changed in the past week. Marina Ryabovolik, a local clothes manufacturer turned army volunteer, offers her own evidence. The Ukrainian military has not yet asked for two things that would usually raise alarm bells: underwear and flags. Doctors put the underwear on wounded soldiers after they have had their uniforms cut open, she says, otherwise they would be evacuated to the next hospital naked. The flags end up on Ms Yarovenko’s coffins. For both women the low point of the war came in mid-March, when a Russian bomb fell on a military barracks in Mykolaiv. Hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers died there, though the exact number was never made public. Ms Yarovenko says she struggled to get hold of enough coffins and crosses. Ms Ryabovolik couldn’t produce enough flags. “Experiences like that are why you won’t see panic, even if the body bags come,” she says. “Anyone who panics has long left this city.” ■