FOR THE past three years it seemed that Chile, one of Latin America’s most successful economies, was lurching decisively to the left. In October 2019 huge protests against inequality and poor public services shook the image of the country as a haven of stability. A year later, Chileans voted in a referendum to have an elected convention rewrite the constitution, which was first drafted under a military dictatorship in 1980 but has since been amended almost 60 times. Then last December they plumped for Gabriel Boric, a bearded and tattooed 36-year-old leftist, to be their president in a ruling coalition with the Communist Party. Now they appear to have had enough. In a referendum on September 4th, 62% of voters rejected the constitution drawn up by the convention; not one of Chile’s 16 regions approved it. Polls had for months shown that the charter would be spurned. But none predicted a 24-point margin. The sheer size of the defeat is a blow to Mr Boric, who supported the constitution-drafting process. Much of the blame for the defeat lies with the convention itself. The elections to choose the 155 members of the body were held in May last year, when many older voters abstained because of the pandemic. Turnout was only 43%. More than two-thirds of those elected were independents, many of them political newbies and activists from the hard left. They quickly alienated the average Chilean voter, who identifies as a centrist. Soon after the vote, one member claimed triumphantly that the left was “going to make the big agreements, and everyone else will have to join us”. The dismissive mantra hurt the convention’s chances of being seen as representative. “The centre-right has represented between 40-45% of the electorate in Chile for decades—excluding that world was a grave mistake,” says Hernán Larraín, a former leader of one of Chile’s largest centre-right parties, who was also a member of the convention. The convention was also beset by scandal. On the day it convened, members of the hard left shouted over an orchestra performing the national anthem. A few months later, another far-left member dropped out after it emerged he had lied about having cancer, which he had played on during his election campaign. Some members showed up in fancy dress; one voted from the shower and had to be asked to turn his camera off. “People thought: if the artists are like this, the work will probably also have major flaws,” says Cristián Valdivieso, the head of Criteria, a polling firm. That view was reinforced when the week before the plebiscite, at an event in favour of the new constitution in Valparaiso, Chile’s second largest city, a drag queen had the national flag pulled out of his rectum while his bandmates encouraged the audience to “abort Chile”. The video appalled many Chileans. The content of the document was equally scandalous. At 388 articles and 170-pages, it would have been one of the world’s longest constitutions. It enshrined over 100 fundamental rights, more than any charter in the world. Chileans would have enjoyed rights ranging from the bizarre–such as to “nutritionally complete” food and “neurodiversity”—to the worrying, including an unfettered right for trade unions to strike. It would also have weakened property rights, replaced the Senate with a debilitated upper house, and created autonomous territories for Chile’s indigenous peoples with their own justice systems. Elected bodies and the independent organs of the state, such as the civil service and central bank, would have been forced to include women in “at least” 50% of leadership positions. Economists estimated that implementing the new constitution would have increased government spending by between 9% and 14% of GDP per year. Now that the text has been buried, questions will turn to the fate of the ruling coalition. The share of people who say they disapprove of Mr Boric has risen from 20% in March, when he took office, to 56% today. Though his government has tried to distance itself in recent months from the work of the convention, the two were still seen as closely tied, says Mr Valdivieso. Mr Boric’s approval ratings fell in line with a rapid drop in support for the body. Some of the government’s problems can be pinned on bad timing. Chile is beset by soaring inflation as in the rest of the world, and crime, which has become voters’ main concern, was rising before Mr Boric took power. But the coalition, composed of young leftists who cut their political teeth as student protesters, has also come across as clumsy. In March the interior minister was forced to flee when an armed group greeted her with gunfire during a visit to the south of the country. She had refused to be accompanied by a security retinue. The government will convene Congress to hammer out next steps. It wants to call another constitutional convention to have a second go at writing a draft. Opposition politicians will try to make it harder for independent candidates to run, and to have the process last only six months instead of another year. “We don’t need to start from scratch. It was the convention’s impulse to refound the country that led to the failure of this process and we need to avoid that,” says Javier Macaya, the president of the Independent Democratic Union, Chile’s largest right-wing party. A cabinet reshuffle is also expected. Out will go the younger faces who are closer to Mr Boric and his party, including the hapless interior minister. They will probably be replaced by members of the centre-left parties that have governed Chile for most of the past three decades, and which steered the country into prosperity. After a year of uncertainty, Chile’s fortunes may soon be revived.