Kwasi Kwarteng, the chancellor of the exchequer, doubtless expected praise for his fiscal statement on September 23rd. Instead, he was met with panic. After announcing the biggest package of tax cuts in half a century, sterling cratered: by the early hours of September 26th the value of the pound had fallen to a record low of $1.035 (it has subsequently recovered a bit). Later that day ten-year gilt yields had reached 4.3%, over one percentage point higher than a week earlier. The gyrations were so extreme that Andrew Bailey, the Bank of England’s governor, published a statement confirming that policymakers were “monitoring developments in financial markets very closely”. The negative reaction came even though most of the budget’s contents had been widely trailed. Liz Truss promised both to scrap a planned increase in corporation tax and to cut payroll taxes while campaigning to become prime minister; she had announced measures to help households and businesses with high energy bills on September 8th. The unexpected elements of the package, which included tax cuts for high earners and higher thresholds for stamp duty, a tax on property transactions, accounted for less than a quarter of its long-run cost. Investors’ anxiety reflected scepticism that the government’s reforms would turbocharge growth and generate enough revenue to put the public finances on a sustainable path. Suggestions over the weekend that the government had yet more tax cuts in the works did nothing to help its credibility. The government tried to restore calm on September 26th by promising to outline its fiscal rules on November 23rd; the Office for Budget Responsibility (obr), a watchdog, will publish its independent forecasts for the public finances on the same day. That did not help much either. If Britain’s institutions and assets look riskier, then foreigners will decline to hold them unless they are cheaper. Britain’s gaping current-account deficit is hardly a sign of rude economic health either. For now, it is unclear how the pound’s slide will spiral into a balance-of-payments crisis. As Britons tend to borrow in sterling but have assets denominated in foreign currencies, sterling depreciation tends to improve the country’s net international investment position. But Mr Kwarteng’s budget will still hurt. A weaker pound means that the cost of buying imports is higher. Samuel Tombs of Pantheon Macroeconomics, a consultancy, calculates that the decline in the value of sterling since July points to a 1.7% increase in the price level in the long term and a 0.5 percentage point increase in cpi inflation in 2024. Although in theory a weaker pound could provide a fillip to British exporters, in practice this effect has been disappointing in the past. Higher interest rates will pinch borrowers, not least the government itself. According to the obr, a one-percentage-point increase in short-term interest rates feeds through to higher debt-service costs for the government that will be worth 0.4% of gdp as soon as 2023-24. If that extra spending is itself financed through higher borrowing, the Bank of England may react further. According to the macroeconomic model run by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a think-tank, extra borrowing worth 1% of gdp would prompt the Bank of England to raise rates by around 0.25 percentage points, further raising the government’s interest costs. The increase in short-term rates that the market now expects by next May could therefore raise borrowing directly by 1.6% of GDP, and then indirectly by roughly another 0.2% of GDP. These debt dynamics are not explosive, but they are expensive. Homeowners will suffer, too. In response to the turmoil some lenders have suspended certain of their mortgage products. Neal Hudson of Residential Analysts, a consultancy, reckons that currently around 300,000 mortgages each quarter are coming to the end of their fixed-rate mortgage period, rising to 375,000 in the second quarter of next year. Mr Tombs estimates that if interest rates rise by as much as investors expect, households refinancing an average two-year fixed-rate mortgage in the first half of next year could see their monthly repayments jump from £863 ($925) to an eye-watering £1,490. Even those without outstanding mortgage debts will feel poorer as house prices drop: Andrew Wishart of Capital Economics, a consultancy, expects falls of 10-15%. Businesses will also be affected. The Bank of England estimated in August that, after taking into account the effects of higher energy prices, funding costs would have to rise to around 7.75% for pressure on corporate balance-sheets to be as widespread as it was at the previous historical peak in 2001, when 62% of companies were vulnerable to repayment difficulties. According to the S&P UK investment-grade corporate-bond index, yields on September 26th were 6.4%. But with such large moves in interest rates, trouble might surface in unpredictable places. All this puts the Bank of England in a nasty bind. At the end of September 26th investors were expecting it to raise interest rates by 1.5 percentage points at its next meeting in November, and then to increase them to 6% by halfway through 2023 (from 2.25% now). If rate-setters do not raise interest rates as aggressively as expected, then the pound could dip further, worsening the problem of imported inflation. But if they do hike that hard, a deep recession is likely. According to Mr Tombs the Bank’s latest forecasts suggest that a one-percentage-point increase in its interest rates raises the unemployment rate by 0.6 percentage points and cuts GDP by 0.8 percentage points. Interest-rate setters are certainly aware of the conundrum. On September 27th Huw Pill, the bank’s chief economist, said that recent market developments had made it harder for monetary policymakers to pursue their inflation target. He added that it was hard not to draw the conclusion that “all this will require a significant monetary-policy response”. Still, it is difficult to believe that rate-setters will go quite as far as investors expect, given the dramatic impact that would have on the real economy. Mr Wishart points out that over the past 50 years the Bank of England has never continued raising interest rates after real house prices have started to fall. This ugly outlook would improve if the government cancelled some of its tax cuts. That seems highly unlikely. On a call with Tory MPs on September 27th Mr Kwarteng said that he thought the volatility was a product of the City feeling surprised by the statement, and that this had now settled down. When asked about the effects of higher interest rates on constituents’ mortgages, he replied that it was for the Bank of England to deal with. “He doesn’t seem very focused on or politically very sensitised to the impact of interest rates going up on mortgages,” says one MP.More likely than a change of course on tax cuts is that the government pencils in efficiency savings to make the fiscal outlook rosier. But without much detail, and in the context of a creaking health-care system, investors may remain sceptical of the government’s resolve to get the public finances under control. Calculations by Anna Titareva and Rohan Khanna of UBS, a bank, suggest that over the next 18 months investors will be asked to soak up almost as much gilt issuance as they have over the past 54. That is going to cost the government a lot more than Mr Kwarteng would have hoped when he stood up to speak a few days ago.