“We are not enemies, but friends,” Abraham Lincoln said in his inaugural address in 1861, on the brink of the civil war. “We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection.” America is not again on the cusp of such a war. But for President Joe Biden the bonds of affection have already snapped. With language far harsher than Lincoln’s, he is warning of a threat from fellow Americans to “the very foundations of our republic”, as he put it in a fierce speech in Philadelphia on September 1st. Lincoln hesitated even to say whether he believed that some Americans were out to destroy the union (“I will neither affirm nor deny”). But Mr Biden is speaking in almost apocalyptic terms about “maga Republicans”. He recently likened their philosophy to “semi-fascism”. In Philadelphia he said they were fanning “the flames of political violence that are a threat to our personal rights, to the pursuit of justice, to the rule of law, to the very soul of this country”. Gone is the Joe Biden of his own inaugural address, who called for unity and an end to “this uncivil war that pits red against blue”. He pledged then: “I will fight as hard for those who did not support me as for those who did.” Now Mr Biden talks of “a battle” against some of those same people. It is a risky approach, but an unavoidable one, because Mr Biden’s medium is his message. He is trying to use American politics to fix American politics. For that he needs Democrats to win elections across the country in November’s midterms. And that in turn means he needs to motivate Democrats to vote by alarming them about what is at stake. Mr Biden wants to nationalise the elections and frame them as an opportunity not to judge his own leadership, a typical focus for midterms, but to beat back the threat posed by his predecessor—and possible successor—Donald Trump. The risk is that he may make saving democracy look like a Democratic project, rather than an American one, and thus a cynical bid for electoral advantage. That would intensify the polarisation he is trying to combat, and raise a political temperature he hopes to lower. In his speech in Philadelphia he tried to distinguish between “maga” and “mainstream” Republicans. But Mr Trump remains by far the most popular leader within the party, and millions of people who consider themselves part of a movement to “Make America Great Again” would have good reason to resent Mr Biden’s accusations that they “embrace anger” and “thrive on chaos”. Mr Trump may have said worse about Democrats. But Mr Biden’s broad-brush treatment recalls Hillary Clinton’s consignment of many Trump supporters to a “basket of deplorables”, or Barack Obama’s description of small-town Americans as clinging “to guns and religion or antipathy toward people who aren’t like them”. Mr Biden could have done more to mitigate the partisanship of his Philadelphia speech, which angered even Republicans opposed to Mr Trump. He chose to make it on what he called “sacred ground”, in front of Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution were signed and debated. But it was lost on no one that he was also standing in a political battleground: Pennsylvania. In his speech the president connected contempt for the rule of law to more conventional Republican positions, such as opposition to abortion. He pivoted awkwardly from warning about maga Republicans to extolling his own record. He did not acknowledge how members of his own party have contributed to the problem, boosting pro-Trump candidates against less radical alternatives in Republican primaries in the belief they will be easier to beat in the general elections. In the most egregious case, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee spent $435,000 to defeat Peter Meijer, a Michigan Republican who voted to impeach Mr Trump over the January 6th insurrection. Mr Meijer’s victorious opponent, John Gibbs, says it is “mathematically impossible” that Mr Biden won in 2020. Once Mr Biden chose to enter this fray, however, a partisan cast to his efforts was inevitable. For most of his term he has tried to avoid naming Mr Trump and to restore some normality to American politics. It has not worked, and he is right about what is at stake. Mr Trump’s lies about the 2020 election have corrupted the Republican Party. It is fielding candidates who have made clear they would try to interfere in ballot counts to help their favoured politicians. As Mr Biden put it in Philadelphia, “Democracy cannot survive when one side believes there are only two outcomes to an election: either they win or they were cheated.” For that reason, saving democracy is in fact becoming a Democratic project. As Mr Biden also said, the threat of political violence is growing as Republican leaders minimise the crimes of those who attacked the Capitol on January 6th 2021, and as they disparage the fbi for its investigation into Mr Trump. As though eager to confirm Mr Biden’s warnings, Mr Trump said on September 1st that if he ran again and won, he would issue “full pardons with an apology to many” of those who stormed the Capitol. Mr Biden’s choice of Independence Hall may have been partisan, but it was deft. Mr Trump and other Republicans like to tar the Democrats as a party that denigrates the founders for being racist and sexist. But Mr Biden, who is coaxing his party back towards the centre, grounded his speech in reverence for America’s founding. Seeing their president go on the offensive against Mr Trump more than made up for any discomfort the president’s patriotic clichés might have caused progressives. “We have never fully realised the aspirations of our founding,” he said, “but every generation has opened those doors a little wider to include more people.” He might have noted that Americans have never fully confirmed the founders’ fears, either, at least not yet. When Benjamin Franklin left Independence Hall at the end of the Constitutional Convention, a woman is said to have asked him whether the outcome was a republic or a monarchy. “A republic,” he replied. “If you can keep it.” ■