Late in the evening of September 1st Argentina’s vice-president was returning to her flat in Buenos Aires when a man leapt forward and pointed a loaded gun at her face at point-blank range. The videos show Ms Fernández recoiling, as if hit by a puff of air. The assailant was quickly overpowered by her security detail. She is alive “because for some reason…the gun didn’t shoot,” declared Alberto Fernández, the president (who is not related to her). He called it the “gravest” event since Argentina returned to democracy in 1983. Amid universal condemnation of the attack, he decreed a public holiday on September 2nd—a measure that might have seemed more appropriate had it succeeded. Many more questions will follow for Argentina, which has been mercifully free of political violence since the 1970s. The suspected assailant, Fernando Montiel, is a 35-year-old Brazilian resident in Argentina with a previous conviction for possession of an unlicensed weapon and with apparent extreme-right wing sympathies. His action came as Ms Fernández has polarised Argentina—not for the first time. She leads the leftist-populist wing of Peronism, the country’s dominant and amorphous political movement. A prosecutor is seeking a 12-year jail sentence against her for allegedly steering public-works contracts, padded by around $1bn, to a crony in Santa Cruz, a remote Patagonian province that had been governed by her late husband and was her first political home. She denies wrongdoing and claims she is the victim of political persecution. For the past ten days her supporters have answered her call to demonstrate outside her apartment in Recoleta, a plutocratic and strongly anti-Peronist neighbourhood of Buenos Aires. Ms Fernández’s political fortunes had been declining in tandem with Argentina’s worsening economy. She was president for two terms until 2015. She feared that she could not win the presidential election in 2019. So she picked Mr Fernández, a former critic of hers, to head the Peronist ticket and to act as her proxy. But she fell out with him after he reached an agreement with the imf and prepared to enact austerity measures which she feared would hurt her political clientele in the impoverished suburbs of Buenos Aires. She has no answers for an economy in which inflation is running at 71% and the Central Bank is printing money and running out of foreign-exchange reserves. In July she was unable to stop Sergio Massa, another Peronist rival, from taking over a beefed-up economy ministry with a programme to cut indiscriminate subsidies. Ms Fernández is the most cunning politician of her generation in Argentina. She has exploited the legal case against her, saying it was “an attack on the whole of Peronism” and obliging her rivals within the movement to support her, as they duly have. At the same time, some in the opposition have adopted increasingly extreme rhetoric against her, such as calling for her to face the death penalty. Argentina is a country of conspiracy theories, real and imagined, and of political theatre. The attack against Ms Fernández will supercharge her status as victim and will prompt a show of Peronist unity on the streets on the public holiday. Many will take at face value the president’s warning against hate speech. Others may wonder how it was that the assailant got so close and the gun failed to fire.■