To the outside world, the past ten days have played out in snippets of video posted on social media. Women defiantly doff their hijabs or cut off their hair in public. Crowds chant “death to the dictator” and chase off policemen. Families weep over the coffins of relatives killed at protests—and then urge their fellow mourners to keep at it. Inside Iran, events since September 16th have been an earthquake. They began after the death in custody of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old student, detained earlier this month by morality police in Tehran, Iran’s capital, for her supposedly incorrect hijab. Her death—photos and witnesses indicate she was badly beaten—tapped a deep well of grievances. Iranians are furious about a disastrous economy and a slate of religious rules imposed by a coterie of grey-haired clerics. Ms Amini’s death became a focal point for that anger. Unrest has been heaviest in major cities and in the north-western Kurdish-majority region, where she lived. But there have been reports of protests in all of Iran’s 31 provinces. State media put the death toll at 41, though it is probably higher. Police have rounded up an untold number of protesters. The Committee to Protect Journalists, an advocacy group, says 20 journalists have been arrested. The government has taken a familiar tack. It calls the unrest a foreign plot co-ordinated by America, Israel and other such evil places (it is not). It organised counter-protests, some with the desultory look of rent-a-crowds. And it has choked the internet, making it hard for Iranians to access social media, vpns and WhatsApp—anything they could use to communicate with each other or the world. Worried Iranians in the diaspora are struggling to contact relatives inside the country. Such tactics have enabled the regime to subdue previous bouts of unrest. A wave of labour protests began in 2018. High prices sparked mass rallies in 2019, when security forces killed hundreds of people. Back in 2009, mass protests erupted over a stolen presidential election. Yet such victories by the regime are beginning to look Pyrrhic. Many Iranians, especially younger ones, feel hopeless. The economy is a mess. The rial has lost 80% of its value since 2018, when President Donald Trump withdrew from the nuclear deal struck with Iran in 2015 and restored American sanctions. Poverty has soared. Inflation is above 50%. In parts of the country food prices have doubled in a year. Ebrahim Raisi, the president elected last year, has no answer to any of this. Efforts to revive the nuclear agreement are deadlocked. His regime’s latest crackdown on protesters will make it harder still for Western powers to reach a new deal. There is airy talk of self-reliance or boosting economic ties with China. For most Iranians, however, the future looks as grim as ever. The conservative ideologues who run the country have no one to blame but themselves. For decades they kept up a democratic façade. Elections were not free—clerics decide who may run for office—but offered a modicum of choice. That pretence has been abandoned. Though Mr Raisi was one of seven candidates, his election was in practice uncontested: popular alternatives were barred from running. Turnout was the lowest in history. The same was true of parliamentary elections in 2020. Half of the 14,000 people who applied to run were disqualified, including 90 serving mps. Faced with a monochrome slate of hardline candidates, most Iranians did not bother to vote. Much of this was done with an eye on a looming transition. Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, is 83 and in poor health, and his successor remains in question. One option is Mr Raisi himself, who seems to have the support of some key constituencies. The other is Mr Khamenei’s son Mojtaba, who has taken a more prominent role of late. But hereditary succession would be unpopular—not to mention ironic, for a regime that took power by toppling a monarchy. Neither man is popular and neither wants to share power, an option which is anyway barred under Iran’s constitution. In seeking to shore up the regime, though, the men in power have also undermined it. If it survives this round of protests, it has no redress for the grievances that caused it; more will follow. With no prospect of reform, Iranians have no choice but to take the streets and demand radical change. With no hope for a better economy and a measure of integration into the world, they feel they have nothing to lose. ■