For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter THE TRANSFER window, which opens for a few weeks twice a year, is a time of hope for football fans. As the only period when European clubs can buy and sell players, it allows supporters across the continent to fantasise about potential signings that might carry their team to glory. But during this summer’s window, which shut on September 1st, most of the excitement has been concentrated in England (see chart). Clubs from the English Premier League did record business, according to data from transfermarkt.com, a website. Taken together, they spent €2.24bn ($2.24bn) on new players, even more than the €2.18bn spent in the 2017-18 season across both transfer windows. The total also dwarfs spending by clubs in the rest of Europe’s “big five” leagues. In fact, the outlay by Premier League clubs nearly exceeded the combined expenditure by their counterparts in France, Germany, Italy and Spain. Some of this is driven by circumstance. Chelsea who, having splurged €282m were the biggest spenders during this window, have a new billionaire-owner, Todd Boehly, keen to make his mark on the club. Manchester United, who parted with €238m, have a new manager, Erik ten Hag, trying to fix a malfunctioning squad. His revamp included the signing of Antony, a Brazilian forward from Ajax, the Dutch champions, at €95m—the biggest fee of the window. Such largesse has not been confined to England’s biggest clubs. Nottingham Forest, only promoted to the top division this season, spent €162m on 21 players, the most signed by a British club in a single window. But the extravagance has largely been driven by the Premier League’s growing clout. A new three-year international broadcast deal worth £5bn ($5.8bn) kicks in this season. According to Deloitte, a consultancy, that will push Premier League clubs’ revenues beyond €7bn, a 9% increase over last season and nearly double that of Spain’s, the next richest league. On average each Premier League club is projected to draw in some €349m. The gap with the rest of Europe is widening, even as many clubs benefit from the Premier League’s transfer splurge. More than 60% of this summer’s spending spree went to clubs outside England. Yet despite roaring revenue growth, few clubs make money. According to Swiss Ramble, a football blogger, only two Premier League teams reported an operating profit in the ten seasons to 2019-20. Clubs on the continent are also spending beyond their means to keep up. This summer Barcelona sold many of their assets, including a share of future income, to finance new signings. Barça spent €153m, the most among non-English clubs. The sport’s authorities are trying to rein in reckless spending. UEFA, the governing body for European football, has announced restrictions that will prevent clubs from spending more than 70% of their revenues on transfers, wages and agents’ fees by 2025. The Premier League is separately planning to introduce similar restrictions, according to the Times. On average, clubs in all the big five leagues, bar Germany, currently exceed the 70% limit. As the Premier League’s revenue soars, that will only entrench the gap between it and the rest of the continent. Little wonder that many of Europe’s top clubs are keen on the financial security of a breakaway European Super League, a closed competition for a handful of elite teams. An attempt to start one in 2021 was scotched after fans revolted and the six English clubs involved abandoned the idea. Then again, their choice was made easier by the fact that they are already in a super league of their own. ■