On september 2nd the Group of Seven (G7) countries launched a new attempt to regain the advantage in the West’s energy confrontation with Russia: imposing a price cap on purchases of Russian oil and oil products, probably to take effect on December 5th. The idea is to allow Russian oil to continue to flow, keeping global markets supplied, but to cut the revenues the Kremlin earns from its oil sales, thereby weakening its economy and war effort. Gazprom immediately responded by announcing that the Nord Stream 1 gas pipeline to Europe, which has been open only sporadically and operating far below capacity, would be indefinitely closed—supposedly because of maintenance issues. The energy conflict has escalated another notch, as winter approaches. But whether the West can regain the advantage is far from clear. The G7’s move is a recognition that its existing energy sanctions have not worked. These have involved prohibiting most Western firms, counterparties and banks from dealing in Russian oil and oil products. America has already stopped buying Russian crude; the European Union will fully prohibit purchases of oil on December 5th, and petroleum products on February 5th 2023. So far these sanctions have had little effect. The International Energy Agency (iea) estimates that Russian oil exports have dropped only slightly, from 8m barrels per day (bpd) in January to 7.4m bpd in July. Russia’s exports to America, Britain, the eu, Japan and South Korea fell by 2.2m bpd, but two-thirds of that has been rerouted to other countries. The biggest buyers of Russian crude include China and India, which can now pay a $20-$30 discount per barrel to the global price. The iea reckons the final stages of the European ban will affect a further 1.3m bpd of Russian crude exports, a significant but far from crippling blow. Meanwhile, with prices high Russia’s export revenues remain vast: the country’s current-account surplus is forecast to reach $265bn this year, the second highest in the world after China. The G7’s latest idea has been debated for months. The ban on Russian oil in the West would probably remain partly or fully in place. But buyers elsewhere could purchase Russian oil through the G7 scheme at a price cap set by the G7 countries—which would be fixed at above Russia’s cost of production. This regime would apply to shipping, insurance and trading firms based in the West that until recently dominated the global business of moving oil around the world. In theory the price cap would achieve several goals. Russian oil would continue to flow, preventing a further global supply crunch. Buyers would pay less for the stuff, mitigating the global energy shock. Non-aligned countries, including China and India, would have an incentive to use the scheme providing that the cap was lower than the roughly $63-$73 per barrel they pay now (Brent crude is currently $93 per barrel). Russia would have an incentive to keep pumping oil, because the price would exceed its cost of production, but it would earn far less revenue. But the plan has two potential flaws. One is that Russia will refuse to participate, preferring instead to attempt to export its oil through networks of non-Western traders, ships and financiers. These networks are smaller than those run from the West, but have been adapting and growing in response to the existing sanctions regime. The second drawback is that the G7 accounts for only about 45% of world gdp, down from 70% three decades ago. Many large countries, including China, India and Indonesia, do not want to be bound by Western foreign policy, sanctions and embargoes. China, for example, is loth to participate in a system of controls that might one day be used against it. India relies on Russia as a supplier for much of its military hardware. Indonesia says it intends to stay neutral. Before the G7 announcement there were reports that Russia was seeking to lock in Asian customers with the promise of long-run discounts. Western countries could threaten sanctions on China and others as punishment for refusing to participate in the G7 scheme. But that would trigger a huge backlash. One possible result of the G7 plan is that the oil market splits into three strands. The roughly 90% of global output not produced in Russia will trade at the usual prices. A proportion of Russia’s oil that cannot be exported without Western infrastructure, ships or insurance will be sold through the G7 scheme, but this may be a minority share, and it will fall as Russia finds ways to adapt. The remainder of Russia’s production will be exported without touching any Western infrastructure, at a price somewhere between the global price and the price cap. Russia’s revenues may fall, but perhaps not by enough to seriously impair its war machine. Meanwhile the Kremlin will continue to squeeze gas supplies to Europe, intensifying a difficult winter. The G7 plan makes life more complicated for the Kremlin, but is unlikely to be a knockout blow. ■