Some 99% of people in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have received at least two covid-19 vaccine doses, the third-highest rate in the world. That helped the country avoid full-scale lockdowns in 2021 and, so far, in 2022. Abu Dhabi and Dubai, its two major cities, have largely remained open for business since the first wave in 2020. Their relatively quick recovery is one reason why the cities rank first and second respectively in a survey of “liveability” in the Middle East and Africa by the EIU, our sister company. The EIU’s global index judges 172 cities—up from 139 last year—on five categories: culture and environment, education, health care, infrastructure and stability. On average, cities in the Middle East and north Africa received a score of 58, compared with 50 for those in sub-Saharan Africa, the world’s least liveable region. (Western Europe, the most liveable region, had an average score of 91.) Though Dubai and Abu Dhabi are top in their part of the world, they rank around the middle globally. Their success with covid was outweighed by lower scores for education and culture. Both cities are still behind Hong Kong, for instance—a city with strict quarantine rules but high scores in other areas. Despite the low overall ranking, life in the Middle East and north Africa seems to be improving: the average score for cities in the region is up to 58 from 53 last year as covid restrictions have eased. Doha, capital of Qatar, which will host the football World Cup later this year, climbed six spots in the global rankings (despite continued criticism of its poor human-rights record and treatment of migrant workers). Kuwait City, capital of one of the fastest-growing economies on the Arabian peninsula, jumped nine places, the biggest such improvement in the region. Cities in sub-Saharan Africa fared less well. Johannesburg, South Africa’s biggest city, remains the most liveable place in the region, but it has dropped five places down the EIU’s rankings. The country’s unemployment rate is at a near record high, blackouts are becoming more frequent and public services are collapsing. As in last year’s survey, Damascus, Syria’s capital, has the world’s worst living conditions. Under Bashar al-Assad’s brutal dictatorship, some 90% of people in Syria live in poverty. Lagos, the commercial capital of Nigeria, also fares poorly, in part because jihadism and organised crime is widespread. Both cities have seen their scores improve slightly on last year, but not by enough to move them out of the bottom two of the world’s ranking. ■