KISHIDA FUMIO, Japan’s prime minister, prides himself on being a good listener. He cannot like what he is hearing these days. A few days after the assassination on July 8th of Abe Shinzo, the country’s longest-serving prime minister, Mr Kishida led his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) to a thumping victory in upper-house elections, marking his second straight electoral triumph. His approval ratings remained comfortably above 50%, where they had been since he took office last October. He appeared poised to enjoy what observers called a “golden” period, with his position in the party secure and the next parliamentary elections three years away. Instead, as Japan prepares to mourn the former prime minister at his funeral on September 27th, Mr Kishida has lost his sheen. In the two months since Mr Abe’s killing, one poll after another has brought bad news. It is a worrying trend for the head of a party that has a tendency to jettison leaders who appear weak in the public eye. In its latest monthly survey Nikkei, a Japanese media giant, found approval of Mr Kishida’s government plunging from 57% last month to 43% in September. Mainchi, a daily, put his approval below 30%, a threshold at which LDP grandees tend to start thinking about whether they would be better off with someone else. The fallout from Mr Abe’s killing precipitated Mr Kishida’s troubles. The public has baulked at the LDP’s attempts to lionise Mr Abe, who, for all his international acclaim, remained a divisive figure at home. Once the initial shock of a deadly shooting in mostly peaceful Japan wore off, attention turned to the killer, Yamagami Tatsuya, who said he murdered the former prime minister because of his links to the Unification Church, a cult-like religious group that Mr Yamagami’s mother joined. The killing shed light on the LDP’s murky ties with the Unification Church (popularly known as the “Moonies”, after the founder, Moon Sun-myung), which run deeper than many Japanese had known. It reinforced the sense that too much in Japanese politics happens behind the curtain, away from the public eye. The result has been rising anger with the government. The public’s reaction caught Mr Kishida off guard. Instead of announcing a swift break with the church, as some close to him advised, the prime minister hemmed and hawed, hoping to avoid internal party feuds while waiting for attention to fade. Frustration grew. Japanese media latched on to the Unification Church. Television talk shows paraded people who said it had wronged them. Founded in South Korea, the church made common cause with Japanese anti-communists, including Mr Abe’s grandfather, in the 1960s. It then spread widely in Japan. It is best known for matching its followers with each other and holding mass weddings. It has faced criticism for its practice of extracting exorbitant fees for spiritual goods: Mr Yamagami’s mother reportedly donated ¥100m ($700,000) to the group. Such stories have struck a chord in Japan. For some, talk of cults brings to mind Aum Shinrikyo, an apocalyptic sect that released sarin gas in the Tokyo subway in 1995, killing 14 people and injuring more than 6,000. The Unification Church has never done anything like that. Nonetheless, association with the church has become a liability for the government. Mr Kishida’s attempts to draw a line under the scandal have only made matters worse. In August he reshuffled his cabinet, in part to distance himself from Unification Church-related figures. Yet more than 20 ministers and vice-ministers turned out to have ties to the group. The LDP later conducted an internal survey which found that nearly half of its 379 lawmakers had links to the church, from receiving campaign support to attending its events. Many Japanese would like to see a more complete accounting of party ties, including Mr Abe’s own relationship to the church. Instead, the government forged ahead with its plans to hold a state funeral for Mr Abe. While the idea might strike foreign observers as innocuous—all American presidents are entitled to such a commemoration—it has been hugely controversial in Japan. Most Japanese oppose the government’s decision to honour Abe in this way. One man set himself on fire near the prime minister’s office in protest (he survived). “Abe may have been the longest-serving prime minister, but he was not the most popular,” points out Hirakawa Eri, a political commentator. Mr Kishida said he intended the funeral to be a sign of Japan’s intent to “defend democracy”. But to many it looks more like an attempt to make criticism of Mr Abe’s legacy taboo. “They’re trying to create an atmosphere where it’s hard to express dissent—they make you feel bad for speaking ill of the dead,” says Miyaguchi Takae, who was among several thousand people protesting against the plan in front of Japan’s parliament on August 31st. The cost—some ¥1.66bn—strikes many Japanese as exorbitant. Others have been taken aback by the historical echoes. State funerals were common during Japan’s imperial era as a means to unify the public around the emperor. It is exceedingly rare for post-war leaders to be honoured in the same way. Mr Kishida might have had an easier time arresting his slide if he had more policy achievements to fall back on. Rising prices, though less acute than elsewhere in the rich world, have riled voters; that may be one reason for the government’s decision, on September 22nd, to prop up the yen for the first time in 24 years. Meanwhile, Mr Kishida has failed to flesh out his signature “New Capitalism” agenda. Nearly a year after he took office, observers still wonder what Mr Kishida actually wants to do with it. The prime minister’s backers hope that the spectacle of foreign leaders paying respects to Abe will prove why the event was necessary. If that fails, Mr Kishida could turn to one of Abe’s favoured tools for re-establishing control: snap elections. Yet while the LDP would probably win—none of Japan’s bumbling opposition parties has managed to capitalise on the frustration with the government—Mr Kishida may not emerge looking any shinier. The coming Diet session, which opens on October 3rd, offers the prime minister an opportunity to buff up his image. He has signalled a desire to change Japan’s energy policy, by backing a return to nuclear power, and to bolster its defence, by spending more on it. Mr Kishida now has less political capital to take on such thorny issues, but also more need to make a mark of his own. To survive, the great listener will need to speak up.■