In 2014 the walls of a room in the Foundling Museum in London were covered with a mural devised by Lemn Sissay, a British poet and author. The work, entitled “Superman was a Foundling”, lists hundreds of fictional characters who were brought up by people other than their birth parents, from Heathcliff and Estella Havisham to Harry Potter and James Bond. As visitors suggested yet more names over the following months, the museum’s director, Caro Howell, noticed that comic-book characters, especially, tended to have “care experience”. This epiphany led to a new exhibition, “Superheroes, Orphans and Origins: 125 years in comics”. “Once you start pulling on this thread,” says Laura Chase, the exhibition’s curator, “it takes you all around the world.” The exhibition includes original artwork and copies of comics from nine countries, including China (Zhang Leping’s “Wanderings of Sanmao”), Japan (Keiji Nakazawa’s “Barefoot Gen”), Spain (Carlos Giménez’s “Paracuellos”) and Sweden (Lisa Wool-Rim Sjoblom’s “Palimpsest”, pictured below). The oldest object on display is a page of R.F. Outcault’s “Hogan’s Alley”, a newspaper strip which introduced a homeless character, the Yellow Kid, in 1895. But the most important place and time for comics about foundlings, orphans, adoptees and foster children was America between the 1920s and the 1940s. Harold Gray’s “Little Orphan Annie” was released in 1924. “Orphans,” declares Annie in one strip, are “kids with so much on th’ ball that they’re bound to make th’ grade—and why? Because they’ve got to make that grade…on their own!” In Frank King’s long-running “Gasoline Alley”, a garage owner, Walt, adopts a boy left on his doorstep in 1921. “You’ve taught me that I wasn’t even living until you came along and parked on my doorstep,” Walt tells his baby a year later. Dick Tracy took in a boy he called Junior in 1932, and Popeye and Olive Oyl began looking after a foundling nicknamed Swee’Pea in 1933. As well as commenting on the reality of American cities’ slums before federal welfare assistance, this inherently dramatic trope enabled child characters to have dangerous adventures, and adult characters to have children without the need to write in a marriage or a pregnancy. When superhero comics were born shortly afterwards, being an orphan was almost a job requirement. In 1938 Jerry Siegel’s and Joe Shuster’s Superman was orphaned twice: first when his home planet of Krypton blew up, then when his adoptive parents, the Kents, died. That looks like carelessness, as Lady Bracknell said of another foundling, but in later “Superman” comics, Martha and Jonathan Kent survived well into his adulthood. Next came Bill Finger’s and Bob Kane’s Batman, who first stalked Gotham City in 1939. As his big-screen incarnations remind viewers all too regularly, Bruce Wayne’s parents were murdered, as were those of Robin, The Boy Wonder, who moved into Wayne Manor in 1940. In 1941 Timely Comics followed the trend by introducing the orphaned Captain America and his orphaned sidekick, Bucky Barnes. Years later, Timely Comics would become Marvel Comics, whose most famous characters include Spider-Man (brought up by his uncle and aunt after his parents were killed), The Hulk (brought up by his aunt after his mother was killed and his father was committed to a psychiatric hospital), Wolverine (ran away from home after his father was killed and his mother was committed to a psychiatric hospital), Daredevil (whose single father was killed by gangsters), Black Panther (mother died in childbirth, father murdered). And so on and on. There are obvious narrative benefits to superheroes who are separated from their birth parents. “They need answers. They need justice. Perhaps they need revenge,” Woodrow Phoenix, a cartoonist, has said. “There is also another very practical reason for taking support away from a child protagonist. If there are parents, then there is someone to say no.” But for children in the care system, this motif has a deeper resonance. Superheroes are outsiders. They feel different from everyone else. Many, such as the X-Men, forge a new family with other people on society’s fringes. In an essay in the exhibition catalogue, Mr Sissay writes about how close he felt to Superman when he was in a children’s home, and how he later spotted the psychological links between them: “Notice how, as an adult, he does everything to hide his past. Notice how he secretly feels like two people…And notice how difficult he finds relationships.” Superman isn’t sure whether to identify with the Kryptonian parents he never knew or the human parents who brought him up. Until the mid-1980s, his friends usually used his alien name, Kal-El; since then they have called him Clark. It is the kind of shift that adoptees will recognise, and which the comic form allows. The most successful strips run for decades, so there is time for the characters to grow, and for their origin stories to develop. “There’s no hurtling towards a denouement in comics,” says Ms Chase. “They just keep going, which reflects our own lives.” The curators argue that youngsters in care can resemble Superman and his peers in other ways, too. “We know from the work we do with young people in care,” says Ms Howell, “that what they go through and what is expected of them when they leave care at 18 is preposterous. The resilience they need is superhuman, and they often go on to achieve great things. They really are superheroes.” ■ “Superheroes, Orphans and Origins: 125 years in comics” continues at the Foundling Museum, London, until August 28th. Picture credits: New York World’s Fair Comics, Vol. 1 #2, Jack Burnley © & ™ DC Comics. All Rights Reserved. Used with permission. Batman, Vol 1 #51, Bob Kane, Charles Paris, Ira Schnapp © & ™ DC Comics. All Rights Reserved. Used with permission. Palimpsest © 2019. Lisa Wool-Rim Sjöblom