Sir Kenneth Branagh launched his film-directing career with a gilded parade of ambitious Shakespeare productions, including “Henry V” and “Hamlet”, but for the past decade he has been content to be a studio hired hand. Need someone to turn out some competent entertainment featuring your most lucrative intellectual properties? Ken’s your man. “Thor”, “Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit”, Disney’s live-action “Cinderella” and “Artemis Fowl” are a few of the middling films which most people will have forgotten that he directed. Now, though, Sir Kenneth has changed course again. During the pandemic he scripted and directed a low-budget, semi-autobiographical, black-and-white drama, “Belfast”. Unlike “Artemis Fowl”, it won the People’s Choice award at the Toronto Film Festival in 2021, as well as securing five-star reviews in British newspapers and a Golden Globe for Sir Kenneth’s screenplay. It is a safe bet to be nominated for Best Picture at the Oscars. This might all suggest a masterpiece to compare with the film it seems to be emulating, Alfonso Cuarón’s “Roma”. But in fact “Belfast” is nowhere near as substantial and wide-ranging as its powerful opening minutes promise. First of all there is a montage, which could have been sponsored by Northern Ireland’s tourism board, showcasing Belfast as a vibrant modern metropolis. The camera then peeks over a muralled wall and sees the black-and-white world of 1969, a terraced street where everyone knows everyone else, and where the nine-year-old Buddy (Jude Hill) plays cheerily with his friends. This idyll is interrupted when Protestant rioters march around a corner, lobbing petrol bombs and smashing windows. Most of Buddy’s neighbours are Protestants, as is Buddy himself, but the rioters announce that they will be back to do more damage if the few Catholics in the area don’t move out. The Troubles have started. How will Buddy and his family get through life now? Quite easily, as it turns out. Rather than spoiling this wide-eyed moppet’s fun, the conflict appears to usher in a golden age of sing-a-longs and street parties in the ever-present sunshine; of bucolic outings with his otherwise extraneous brother (Lewis McAskie) and his unfeasibly attractive parents (Caitríona Balfe and Jamie Dornan); of heart-to-hearts with his wise and twinkly grandparents (Judi Dench and Ciarán Hinds). The bouncy soundtrack is made up of Van Morrison’s greatest hits, the dialogue consists of punchlines, polished aphorisms and clunky exposition—and the plot is barely there. Buddy simply meanders from one sentimental anecdote to another, many of them built around cultural activities that foreshadow Sir Kenneth’s career. The family sees “A Christmas Carol” at the theatre, and “Chitty Chitty Bang Bang” at the cinema, as if to answer the pressing question of how Buddy/Sir Kenneth fell in love with plays and films. Taking the self-mythologising further still, he is shown reading an issue of a “Thor” comic, presumably to remind viewers of the Marvel superhero blockbuster he would direct decades later. In the meantime, Buddy’s biggest concern is whether he’ll pluck up the courage to talk to a pretty girl at school. His parents’ biggest concern is whether to leave Belfast and move overseas. Some touching, superbly acted conversations convey how intensely painful it is for them to be pushed out of the city they love. But the alternative is a well-paid job and a large house in a town that isn’t at war with itself, so, as dilemmas go, it could be worse. On the other hand, maybe the family should stay put, because they are almost entirely unaffected by the Troubles. Every 15 minutes, a one-dimensional villain, Billy Clanton (Colin Morgan), turns up and snarls to Buddy’s dad that he must contribute to the Protestant cause. Every time, Buddy’s dad tells him to get lost, and then disappears to his construction job in England for another fortnight, so he is obviously not too worried. There is no palpable danger, and no apparent risk of the boys getting dragged into any wrongdoing greater than stealing a chocolate bar from a corner shop. That could be why the film has gone down so well. The monumental title and the stressful opening riot indicate that “Belfast” is going to be a challenging watch, but it turns out to be a nostalgic account of a happy working-class childhood with no interest in the city beyond the tiny corner where Buddy lives, and no exploration of its history and politics. Viewers in the mood for a lightweight domestic comedy drama will enjoy it, but its most remarkable quality is that a film set against a backdrop of sectarian violence should be so comfortingly warm and cosy. ■ “Belfast” is playing in British cinemas now. It was released in America in September