In February 1922 a new magazine was launched in New York. The elegant cover promised articles “of enduring value and interest, in condensed and compact form”. Its 64 pages, a pocket-size seven-and-a-half by five-and-a-half inches, were full of information and practical suggestions, extracted from other publications. The first item, “How to Keep Young Mentally”, offered a taste of two lasting preoccupations: lifelong learning and the rewards of being upbeat. The venture was the brainchild of DeWitt Wallace, a 32-year-old former university drop-out from Minnesota. He had dreamed it up more than three years earlier, while recovering from shrapnel wounds sustained on the Western Front. Wallace had some form in publishing: in 1916 he had sold 100,000 copies of a pamphlet called “Getting the Most Out of Farming”. But 18 companies rejected his new idea, dismissing it as either dry or quaint. Undeterred, Wallace set up in a Greenwich Village basement, alongside his wife, Lila Acheson Wallace, and with occasional help from the patrons of the speakeasy upstairs. Within seven years they had more than 200,000 subscribers—a figure that would eventually grow to 18m, in 22 languages and across 40 countries. A century on from that debut, and almost 1,200 issues later, to say the words Reader’s Digest is to conjure an image of idle moments in dentists’ waiting rooms. Or if not that, mailshots for prize draws, promising “the sooner you reply, the more money you could win”. The name is synonymous, too, with right-of-centre politics. Typical of the magazine’s hostility to communism was the publication in 1941 of an essay by Max Eastman—a political activist who once revered Karl Marx—with the memorable title “Socialism Doesn’t Jibe with Human Nature”. Nothing seemed quite so symbolic of its advocacy of suburban family values, meanwhile, as the company’s move from Manhattan to the village of Pleasantville in New York State. To its critics, Reader’s Digest has long been a corny compendium of real-life survival stories, “points to ponder” and suggestions for self-improvement (such as how to enrich your vocabulary, or “word power”). Perhaps its least lovely innovation was the condensed book, which packed abridgements of several bestsellers into a single hardback volume. A representative example, from 1991, sees Dick Francis rub shoulders with Barbara Taylor Bradford and Bernard Cornwell. But the magazine has a noble history of campaigning—against syphilis, for instance, and in favour of organ donation. As early as 1924 it reproduced a story linking tobacco consumption to premature death; it would return to the theme often, notably in 1952 with an article headlined “Cancer By the Carton”. In the very first episode of “Mad Men”, an ad man ponders a cigarette billboard and remarks: “So what if Reader’s Digest says they’re dangerous?” Not until 1933 did the magazine run a wholly original article, but two years later it printed probably its most influential piece, Joseph Furnas’s “—And Sudden Death”. At a time when cars and driving were routinely glorified, Furnas painted a grim picture of their dangers: “The automobile is treacherous” and driving at high speeds “can instantly turn this docile luxury into a mad bull elephant”. Within three months, 4m copies of the article had been distributed to motorists, prompting a national debate about auto safety. Reader’s Digest was the first publication to document, in the form of excerpts from a book by John Barron and Anthony Paul, the Khmer Rouge’s savagery in Cambodia. Its pages were the platform for a confessional account by Betty Ford, a former First Lady, of her battle with addiction to prescription drugs and alcohol. The magazine supported Alex Haley’s research for his novel “Roots” (1976), which transformed American perceptions of slavery; the idea for “The Autobiography of Malcolm X” (1965) took seed when Haley interviewed the civil-rights activist for a Reader’s Digest piece about the Nation of Islam. Today the magazine is published in only ten languages, and its cultural influence is more modest. Once legendary for munificent rates of pay and an army of fact-checkers, it has suffered from the contraction of print journalism. Its parent company has filed for bankruptcy twice this century. But Reader’s Digest endures, and so does the spirit of DeWitt Wallace, whose enthusiasm for sharing other publications’ gems made him the grandfather of content aggregators. ■