The Jane Collective was bold. Not only did the organisation illegally provide women with abortions in Chicago in the 1960s and early 1970s, but it advertised its services, too. It placed flyers at bus stops and paid for spots in local newspapers. “Pregnant? Need help?” such missives read. “Call Jane.” Two films that recently had their premiere at Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah, endeavour to tell the story of the network. “The Janes” (pictured top), a documentary, uses archival footage and interviews to reconstruct the group’s history. Many of the women had been involved previously in the anti-war and civil-rights movements; campaigns in which, in the words of one former member, their voices had been drowned out by young men quoting Karl Marx. They sought a cause and a way to make a difference. Their efforts began with a kind of helpline, the Abortion Counselling Service of Women’s Liberation, which directed women to sympathetic doctors. When the group discovered that its go-to surgeon wasn’t a surgeon at all, but a huckster with links to the mob, the women began performing the abortions themselves. (They did not have formal medical training; they learned how to administer the procedure from an abortionist.) Since what they were doing was illegal, members used the name Jane as a group pseudonym. The second film, “Call Jane” (pictured below), is a fictional account inspired by the real collective. Joy (Elizabeth Banks) is a wealthy housewife with congestive heart failure; she finds the group after a hospital denies her request to end her pregnancy, even though continuing with it could have grave consequences. After her abortion, the women serve Joy spaghetti and let her rest before she heads home to her husband, Will (Chris Messina), and teenage daughter. The scene is a stark contrast to the underground clinic on Chicago’s west side that Joy had fled before finding the Janes. That contrast is one of the recurring themes of both films. “Call Jane” and “The Janes” argue that an abortion service run by women and for women is necessarily kinder and safer than the alternatives that Joy, and many others of that era, considered. “Maybe if a lady was helping they wouldn’t tense up so much, you know?” muses a male abortionist in “Call Jane”. Despite the similarities in subject matter, there are some intriguing differences between the two films. Chicago itself is a character in the documentary, which begins with footage from the protests at the Democratic National Convention in 1968. Many of the Janes admit to being radicalised by the violent police response to those protests, and the women revelled in the city’s activism. “That was the beauty of Chicago,” says one Jane. “It was a town where people did stuff.” “Call Jane”, on the other hand, treats Chicago merely as the backdrop for its plot. The opening scene shows Joy and Will at a posh party; as they leave, protesters are being beaten by police. The film makes other allusions to the political climate in the city at that time: Joy admits to forgetting to vote in the presidential election of 1972, and a black member of the Janes chastises the mostly white group for not helping more African-American women who can’t afford the usual fee. But these scenes are brief, and seem to nod to the other issues roiling Chicago and America rather than engaging with them meaningfully. The films are clear, however, in their criticisms of America’s medical system and its poor treatment of women. The all-male hospital board that denied Joy an abortion displays more concern for the baby’s health than hers. Jody, one of the leaders of the real-life Janes, tells interviewers that her motivation was taking back power from male doctors. Similar criticisms could be levelled at America’s health-care system today. Maternal-mortality rates are declining around the world, yet they are increasing in America. Black women die from pregnancy-related complications at more than three times the rate white women do. A recent study published in JAMA, a medical journal, found that women treated by female surgeons had better outcomes than those treated by men. The timing of these films is apt, too. America’s Supreme Court is considering Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organisation, a case involving a Mississippi law banning most abortions after 15 weeks. The conservative court may take the chance to abandon the precedent set in Roe v Wade, a landmark ruling that established a legal right to abortion in 1973. Emma Pildes, co-director of the documentary, suggested that “The Janes” warns viewers what the country could look like again if abortion rights are restricted. Some parallels between the pre-Roe days and modern times already exist. In the early 1970s women of means flocked to New York, where abortion was legal. Today, women in conservative Texas travel to liberal Colorado. The Janes provided 11,000 safe abortions between 1968 and 1973; not a single woman died in their care. “Call Jane” alludes to these thousands of patients at the very end of the film. The group has gathered to toast Roe, plot their next cause and burn the index cards that reveal the details of the women they helped over the years. But before the cards go up in flames, each one is read aloud. Kate, 30, eight weeks. Sally Ann, 25, three weeks. Harlize, 19, nine weeks. Geraldine, 34, 11 weeks. “I’m glad we could help them,” one of the real-life Janes told the film-makers. “But they shouldn’t have had to go through it.” ■