Picture a building made of 3d-printed glass, with columns engineered to capture solar energy by acting as optical lenses. Or a tent-like shelter for those without a roof, programmed to decay when no longer needed (see picture). Consider a pavilion built from glass imbued with melanin, which shifts from light to dark and back again, regulating the temperature and shade inside. Each of these designs exists as a prototype, invented and built at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (mit). The lab was created in 2010 by Neri Oxman, an architect and scientist who pioneered a new field called “material ecology”. All of the designs are the result of an imaginative leap Ms Oxman made nearly 20 years ago: what if you could grow a building? What if the materials humans used in their everyday lives did not harm the environment, but instead were organic? That way, humankind could build not just in harmony, but in collaboration, with nature. Ms Oxman studied medicine for two years in her native Israel before switching to architecture, first at the Technion Israel Institute of Technology, then at the Architectural Association School of Architecture in London, before completing a doctorate in material science at mit. She credits her medical studies in biology and chemistry with helping inspire her unusual approach to architecture. Invited to establish her own lab at mit, she hired a multidisciplinary staff of mechanical engineers and biologists, product designers, architects and material scientists, and they formed a group called Mediated Matter. Nearly 40 of the team’s wondrous designs can be seen in a new exhibit at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (sfmoma), in which the boundaries between the disciplines of art and science, engineering and design melt away. Meanwhile, Ms Oxman’s next step—scaling up to larger structures—is under way. She left her tenured post at mit in 2020, after becoming a mother. That year a scientific paper was published showing that, for the first time, the anthropomass—or total mass of man-made materials—exceeded the biomass of life on Earth. Both events galvanised her to set up her own company to develop real-world products and structures based on this experimental technology. “We’ve just superseded the mass of trees and shrubs compared with our concrete jungle,” she says. “If anything will save us from climate change, it’s our humility, our ability to embrace new values in the art of building.” Those values are partly inherited: Ms Oxman is the daughter of two of Israel’s most eminent architects and the granddaughter of an engineer who worked on Haifa Bay and kibbutzim in the 1930s. She is deeply interested in the “symbiosis between the built and the natural environment,” she says. Yet if it is designers who “messed up” the environment, she says, it is their responsibility today to reshape “how we think about material reality…clothing, artefacts, products, cars, airplanes, rockets and, of course, buildings and cities.” Her lab does this by crafting objects with properties that can be digitally programmed. Take the individual hut, called “Aguahoja”. One multicoloured pod is five metres high, with panels spun out of crushed seashells, pectin and cellulose. The panels vary in thickness and location depending on the structural requirements and the wavelength of light desired to attract pollinators or repel pests. In every case, Ms Oxman’s team has to invent new technology to make the ideas a reality. Existing 3d printers, for example, were not able to create glass loops with walls of varying thickness for the lenses—so the team invented one that could. Many of these experimental works are strikingly beautiful, if not immediately useful. Think of each prototype as a “message in a bottle”, Ms Oxman says: every innovation may potentially lead to a new kind of product or building. Some experiments demonstrate ways in which living cells can be combined with wearable technology. These include breastplates for extraterrestrial exploration that might turn light into energy, and death masks whose filaments contain the deceased’s last breath. Bizarre as the masks may be, the underlying technology may prove useful in—for example—delivering drugs or antibiotics, the scientists suggest. (The idea grew out of a commission by Björk, the Icelandic musician, who wanted a covering that would move with the musculature of her face as she sang.) An interactive chair of wood and spongy nodes was designed as a chamber to calm the body, originally for the Dalai Lama. A similar cocoon in a nearby vitrine is intended as a cinema. This autumn Oxman Architects will open 36,000 square feet of biology, software and hardware labs on the west side of Manhattan. Commissions are on the horizon but cannot be divulged. She says her key tenet is to “imagine that nature is the single most important client in your architectural practice”. Recently the team envisaged the bio-regeneration of New York for “Megalopolis”, a forthcoming science-fiction film by Francis Ford Coppola. The models on display at sfmoma show a sentient biosphere spreading across the island, returning it to its prehuman state. Reinventing humanity’s footprint will require such a fusion of the natural and man-made, Ms Oxman believes. “Why hurry to Mars,” she asks, “when we can combine nature’s wisdom with human wisdom so that nature will never want us to leave this planet?” ■ “Nature x Humanity: Oxman Architects” continues at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art until May 15th