A photograph, printed in Vogue in 1952, captures Francis Bacon in his element: bare-chested, staring intently and clutching the fleshy remains of something slaughtered. To paint the human figure, the British artist, who died in 1992, sought inspiration from the animal carcasses he saw hanging in butcher-shop windows. He seemed to delight in reducing his subjects to blood and bone. Throughout his 50-year career Bacon was preoccupied by mankind’s animal nature, as a new exhibition at the Royal Academy in London makes clear. Curated by Michael Peppiatt, one of Bacon’s close friends and biographers, “Francis Bacon: Man and Beast” is the first time Bacon’s interest in animals has been properly explored. Born in 1909, Bacon was brought up on an estate in County Kildare, Ireland. While his elder brother took up horse-riding and hunting, Bacon preferred to remain indoors on account of his asthma. His unsympathetic father, an ex-soldier turned racehorse-trainer, persevered in dragging his son outside and thrashed him when he began to have a coughing fit. No doubt traumatised by his childhood, the adult Bacon was contemptuous of the countryside and its wildlife, “all those things singing outside the window”. The exhibition reveals that he was more interested in the animal within. A key influence was his relationship with Peter Lacy, a former fighter pilot whom he met in 1952. The men shared a taste for alcohol and sadomasochistic sex—on one occasion, Bacon nearly lost an eye when Lacy drunkenly pushed him through a plate-glass window. The artist delighted in encouraging Lacy’s animal urges for lust and violence, then painting the aftermath: a portrait of 1957 depicts Lacy with a dark pelt and simian face, sprawled in a corner of a cage. Inspired by the big game he had once seen on safari in South Africa, Bacon depicted the couple as animals unleashed. In “Figures in a Landscape”, from 1956-7, they are naked and grappling in scorched savanna grass. In his South Kensington studio, Bacon hoarded thousands of x-rays, newspaper cuttings and photographs of elephants, dogs, bulls and monkeys. By pairing these images with the paintings they inspired, this new exhibition shows the striking resemblances Bacon found between man and other species: the wings of an owl and the hunched shoulders of his lover, or the leathery hide of a rhino and the skin-folds of his own face. Art history supplied Bacon with his most famous subjects. “Portrait of Pope Innocent X”, by the Spanish artist Diego Velázquez, was an inexhaustible source of inspiration. Between the 1940s and the 1960s Bacon produced around 50 variations of the work (see above), although his sharp-fanged figures better resemble howling chimpanzees than the 17th-century pontiff. Cimabue’s “Crucifix”, from the 13th century, was another obsession: Christ’s green and contorted body put Bacon in mind of a “worm crawling down the cross”. It inspired what is surely one of the most harrowing crucifixions ever painted: in “Fragment of a Crucifixion” (1950), Bacon’s Christ is an ugly, bone-white apparition, swooping down the canvas towards the viewer. Bacon’s paintings are not easily understood, but they never fail to unsettle. Stripped of clothes and respectability, the gaping mouths and butchered limbs of his figures shock the viewer into an awareness of their own fleshiness. In interviews he rejected the idea that his work could be interpreted rationally. It was made, he said, to assault the viewer’s “nervous system”. (He kept an illustration of that tacked to his studio wall.) With its biographical focus, the exhibition connects the animal anguish of Bacon’s paintings with the many tragedies that afflicted his life, beginning with his brutal childhood. A consequence of belonging to the relentlessly boozy circle at the Colony Room club in London was that Bacon suffered the loss of many friends, including Lacy in 1962. Perhaps none had as devastating an impact as the death of George Dyer, a handsome burglar from the East End whom Bacon had met in 1963. Their relationship was fraught with jealousy, violence and alcoholism, eventually culminating in Dyer’s suicide, alone in a hotel room in Paris in 1971. It plunged Bacon into a state of terror as unrelenting as any he painted. Bacon never flinched from the truth, but did he find catharsis painting it? To judge by his “Black Triptychs”, completed in the wake of Dyer’s death, the answer is unclear. In “Triptych August 1972”, Dyer is pictured as another trapped animal, sitting in front of a dark void. But in this heartbroken painting—which closes the Royal Academy’s show—Bacon seems to accept the fact that “we are all potential carcasses”. Dyer is not howling or writhing. With his head high and eyes closed, he appears resigned, even serene. ■ “Francis Bacon: Man and Beast” continues at the Royal Academy, London, until April 17th