ENGLAND’S PREMIER LEAGUE is not all about glamour. On February 12th Brentford and Crystal Palace fought out a 0-0 draw in west London in a game of such mediocre quality that there was little for fans to cheer. Between them the teams managed only five shots on target—or one every 18 minutes.But both clubs will be happy with a point if that means they survive in the Premier League for another season. Palace have managed this for nine successive years without ever threatening the top of the table. Their highest position was tenth in 2014-15, although they reached the FA Cup Final a year later. Before that, Palace had suffered two declines into financial administration and a reputation as a “yo-yo” club—one that bobs between repeated relegations and promotions. Norwich City and Watford are regular yo-yos. Both were relegated from the Premier League to the Championship in 2019-20, promoted in 2020-21 and now face the drop once more, sitting in the bottom three of the table. Fulham, the top team in the Championship, were relegated from the Premier League last season. At Brentford, fans are just happy to see Premier League football at all. Before this season, the club’s last appearance in the top flight of English football was in 1947. As recently as 2009, the Bees were in the fourth tier of the professional game. But the club, with the financial backing of Matthew Benham, who made his money in sports betting, has enjoyed a remarkable renaissance. In 2020, it moved to the spanking new Brentford Community Stadium near Kew Bridge in west London, which is regularly filled with 17,000 enthusiastic supporters who belt out “Hey Jude” by the Beatles—which has become a pre-match anthem—before kick-off. The club has strong Scandinavian connections. Its manager, Thomas Frank, is Danish; Pontus Jansson, the club captain, is Swedish; and at the end of 2021, there were seven Danes in the first team squad. Now the Bees have signed another. The biggest applause at the Palace match occurred before the game had even started, when Christian Eriksen walked onto the pitch to a standing ovation. In June 2021, during the Euro championships, Mr Eriksen collapsed on the field after suffering a cardiac arrest while playing for Denmark against Finland. The match was suspended, with the players clearly in distress at Mr Eriksen’s condition. Later he was fitted with an automated defibrillator to avoid a repeat of the incident. That Brentford took a chance on Mr Eriksen’s health is not too surprising, given the financial constraints placed on a club in its position. Backed by new Saudi owners, Newcastle United spent £100m ($135m) or so on new players in the January transfer window, and now look like pulling free of relegation. Brentford spent nothing (Mr Eriksen was a free agent: because of his condition, he had to leave his previous club, Internazionale of Milan). Like many others, Brentford shop in the bargain basement: the top scorer, Ivan Toney, was acquired in 2020 for a reported £5m fee from Peterborough United. Getting promoted to the Premier League may have been highly lucrative (bringing in at least £100m per year) but it is still tough competing with the big guys: the annual wage bill at Manchester City, the league leaders, is around £160m. If Mr Eriksen can find some of his old form, he may be just what Brentford need to survive. After an encouraging start to the season, they had lost their previous five Premier League matches before the Palace game. Mr Toney was injured for the Palace match and the team’s tactics seemed to revolve around passing it back to their goalkeeper, David Raya, who then hoofed it upfield. Still, Brentford is one of those clubs that it is easy for neutrals to love. The ground has a local feel reminiscent of a minor-league baseball team: during the half-time break, birthday messages were read out for supporters. If you are a London-based football fan in search of glamour and glory, you could back Arsenal, Chelsea or Tottenham. When you opt to support Brentford, you are guaranteeing many years of heartache. At the Palace game, your correspondent was surrounded by families, with children excited at watching a top-flight match. One day, they may recall to their grandchildren the first time they saw their team play. Like Mr Eriksen, such fans deserve a little longer in the limelight.