The summer of 1995 was sultry. A heatwave broiled North America and western Europe for much of July; people escaped to air-conditioned cinemas to watch “Batman Forever”, ‘“Apollo 13” and “Pocahontas”. TLC’s “Waterfalls” and Seal’s “Kiss from a Rose” topped the charts. And in Malibu, California, two of the world’s biggest stars⁠—Pamela Anderson, a starlet on “Baywatch”, and Tommy Lee, the drummer for Mötley Crü⁠e—were burgled by a disgruntled former employee. Thanks to burgeoning internet use, this contretemps would lead to the widespread distribution of a private, 54-minute home video Ms Anderson and Mr Lee had made, a film that included around eight minutes of the couple having sex on their honeymoon. The individuals who distributed the video made an estimated $77m in just 12 months. Unfolding over eight hour-long episodes, “Pam & Tommy”, Hulu’s new show about the saga, is undeniably compelling. By turns pathetic, sweet and utterly ridiculous⁠—one scene involves Lee holding a conversation with his own penis⁠—the show may nevertheless leave viewers feeling a little queasy. Craig Gillespie, who directs the first three episodes, brings the same maximalist flair, frenetic pacing and dark humour he unleashed in “I, Tonya” (2017), his film about another cause célèbre of the 1990s. Largely based on a Rolling Stone article about the heist and its aftermath, “Pam & Tommy” focuses as much on the thieves and would-be entrepreneurs⁠—handyman and sometime porn star Rand Gauthier (Seth Rogen) and seedy adult-film director Milton Ingley (Nick Offerman)⁠—as the victims, Ms Anderson (Lily James) and Mr Lee (Sebastian Stan). The casting is superb. Mr Rogen’s Gauthier is jealous, thoughtless, inept and oddly childlike. He is also one of life’s perpetual underdogs: the show introduces him as he builds a custom bed in the half-refurbished mansion of the newly-weds while they copulate loudly in the room above. Bursting into the room on a post-coital high, and wearing nothing but a tiger-print thong and his tattoos, Lee demands major changes to the layout despite not having paid the agreed fees upfront and having already signed off on designs. “I’ve sold 50,000 albums; I can’t move a bed ten feet to the left?” Later, an even meaner side to Lee’s character is depicted: he fires Gauthier then pulls a gun on him when he tries to collect his tools. (Mr Lee has not commented on the claims.) Small wonder that Gauthier seeks revenge. As Anderson, meanwhile, Ms James (“Cinderella”, “Downton Abbey”) is uncanny, veering between winsome and knowing. She seems just as at sea in her life as Gauthier is in his. “Is that how you feel, like you gotta please people?” a prospective publicist asks. Her smile doesn’t reach her eyes as she replies: “It’s all I do.” Yet Anderson’s role as the emotional anchor and the most sympathetic of the characters in “Pam & Tommy” is deeply unsettling. This is a show about the non-consensual exploitation of an intimate artefact. While Lee has little to lose reputationally⁠—indeed, his bad-boy image is only enhanced by the revelation that he is exceptionally well hung⁠—Anderson’s career ambitions lie in tatters. She is the butt of a thousand jokes, hounded by paparazzi and gleefully belittled by the media, all while being pregnant with her first child. The intent, no doubt, is to make viewers question their own participation in a culture that continues to commodify women’s bodies. (It will surprise no one to learn that searches for “Pamela Anderson sex tape” have surged in recent months.) Mr Gillespie has argued that the film-makers “absolutely respect the privacy” of Ms Anderson and Mr Lee. Yet this is rather complicated by the fact that Ms Anderson herself was not involved in “Pam & Tommy”, nor did she give the production her blessing. However well-crafted the show, and no matter how sensitively Ms Anderson is portrayed, a story about consent made without its subjects’ permission feels a little grubby. “Pam & Tommy” is streaming on Hulu now