American public schools have become aggressively anti-white, pushing radical racist theories into our publicly funded classrooms that threaten the very fabric of our society. And Critical Race Theory (crt) is the reason why. Tune into any conservative news programme on TV or radio, read any conservative publication, or pop into any conservative Facebook or Telegram group, and you’ll encounter this message whenever schools are brought up. How did this obscure, arcane legal theory become the latest inflammatory buzzword in the anti-public-school debate? I was once one of the libertarian-conservative movement’s pitch men, a public-relations specialist and lobbyist working with the Goldwater Institute and the Foundation for Government Accountability. Depending on the context, I would work with teams of people or semi-independently at these two think-tanks to hone messaging so as to advance our policy objectives. I have a unique insight into how groups pushing radical rhetoric about public schools craft their campaigns. The goal of conservative libertarianism is to dismantle every publicly funded service with very few exceptions, such as policing and court systems, which are easily controlled by a powerful few. Its proponents want a minimalist state with as little government intervention as possible, and that is a critical lens for their vision of education. It’s critical for the radical right and libertarians that the state holds no power to address inequities in our society. One of their greatest challenges is that the unpopularity of their vision makes it impossible to win people over on a straightforward policy message. This has proven especially true when it comes to campaigning for school-choice policies and programmes, such as vouchers that parents can use to send their children to private schools. Conservatives can’t tell Americans that social security is awful, because so many of them recognise the benefits of the programme to themselves or to people they care about. They can’t criticise Medicaid and Medicare effectively because people have positive experiences with these health programmes. And the same is very true for public schools. While it can be easy to feel that Americans are critical of their country’s public schools, the reality is that across the political spectrum, a majority appreciate them. That’s why voters have overwhelmingly rejected vouchers when they’ve been put to a vote, defeating them at least 26 times since the 1960s. In response, conservatives have built robust organisations to support their goals, from the State Policy Network, a confederation of state-based policy mills; to the American Legislative Exchange Council, which brings together lobbyists, companies and lawmakers to create model legislation for state governments; and even the Atlas Network, an American-based network of right-wing policy outfits around the world. Together they donate millions to politicians at every level of government, host lavish conferences and push policies that would never win public support otherwise. They undermine our way of life. One thing these conservatives understand clearly is how connected our institutions are, whether it’s public schools, voting rights, public services, transit or the rest. That is why nearly every group working to privatise education either works on, or is funded by people who work on, dismantling all our other institutions concurrently. For example, just one small policy mill in Michigan, the Mackinac Centre for Public Policy, concurrently pushes anti-labour policies, school privatisation, privatising public pensions, pro-fossil-fuel policies, and others. Many initiatives receive funding from wealthy foundations whose dollars help drive the direction of policy. The next step is to use “culture war” messaging to denigrate public programmes and public institutions. Social security becomes a socialist behemoth that’s unsustainable and will fail to deliver a return to workers. Medicaid and Medicare undermine the work ethic of people in need (really they are lazy and have their hands in your pockets). And public schools are training your kids to be transgender racists who hate white people and Christianity. Consider an example from the Club for Growth, a conservative advocacy organisation. Last year it found that “school choice” had been too “battered” by opponents. “Branding, therefore, needs a new look,” it advised. Its research also concluded that related messaging can vary by location (urban, suburban or rural) and demographic. “Critical Race Theory arguments are effective only among Republicans,” it suggested. If you asked the right-wing journalist Christopher Rufo, he would tell you he invented the crt panic as a way to make public schools unpopular. Although he played a role in initiating the crt panic, he didn’t invent anything. He’s merely building on a centuries-old tactic that has been trotted out whenever conservatives have felt left behind by social progress. What is different now is Mr Rufo’s messaging has an entire universe of media outlets standing at the ready to spread his message to tens of millions of Americans at speed. The crt debate is just the latest excuse for conservatives to denigrate public schools. They are trying to hold on to power as society evolves beyond them. From the critiques of evolution being taught in science classes culminating in the Scopes Monkey Trial of 1925, to rabid opposition to sexual-health classes from the 1960s to today, their industrial media machine feeds on outrage. That means that right-wing groups have to produce new grievances continually in order to push forward with their policies. As soon as people see through the smoke and mirrors, they stop supporting privatisation schemes. Already crt is starting to fade into the rear view. Today it’s pro-lgbtq+ discussion that is attracting ire. (Supposedly teachers are grooming kids to get irreversible gender-reassignment surgery.) In a few months it will be something else. Fortunately there is hope. Even in Republican areas, ideologues in favour of book bans and the like are largely failing in their efforts to win local school-board elections in places including North Carolina and New Hampshire. We can endure these attacks and we can win these fights. The best advice I can offer is to listen to marginalised communities, especially black women, and to empower them to lead movements, as historically they have been kept out of powerful positions. Additionally, groups fighting the privatisation onslaught must compensate people. The best working environment I ever had was in conservative politics. I was well paid, I had a good work-life balance and I was empowered to help build entire programmes. We have to stop relying on the unpaid labour of volunteers and activists, most of whom are women, if we want to have any hope of sustaining a movement in opposition to the radical conservatives. We can always make a big difference in our small circles, and that adds up. ■_______________ Charles Siler is a former lobbyist for the pro-voucher Goldwater Institute. He also previously worked for the Foundation for Government Accountability. Mr Siler has since worked with groups across America to oppose vouchers and promote well-funded public schools. He is a co-founder of Agave Strategy, which provides public-relations support. For other pieces in this series please see Jason Stanley’s essay and Bonnie Kerrigan Snyder’s essay.