This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. The chinese communist party is desperate to control China’s past as well as its present. Histories of the country, particularly those that deal with periods that the government would rather forget, or rewrite, are as tightly controlled as contemporary journalism. But some Chinese and Western writers manage to lift the veil on the country’s tumultuous past. Comparisons are often made between Xi Jinping, China’s current leader, and Mao Zedong, the first leader of the People’s Republic. These six books help to make sense of how the arc of history, in the years that have passed between those two men, has bent towards, and away from, progress. Woman from Shanghai: Tales of Survival from a Chinese Labor Camp. By Yang Xianhui. Translated by Wen Huang. Anchor Books; 320 pages; $16 In the remote deserts of Gansu province, in north-west China, is a former labour camp called Jiabiangou. More than 3,000 “rightists” were imprisoned there in the late 1950s as part of Mao Zedong’s campaign against intellectuals. Less than one-quarter of them survived. Their stories are captured in this volume of oral histories by Yang Xianhui, a writer from the same province. In the late 1990s he spent three years interviewing the camp survivors he could find. His lightly fictionalised versions of their stories⁠—changing details to get past censors⁠—won several short-story awards. They are shocking tales of arbitrary cruelty of the gulag, told in spare prose. Innocent people, including many loyal Communist Party members, were labelled “rightists” out of spite or to meet quotas. Victims were pushed into depravity: starving prisoners stole and became cannibals, eating one another’s vomit and flesh in order to survive. In 1981 the party acknowledged that the Anti-Rightist Campaign was “too broad”, but still “entirely correct and necessary”. But any frank, open discussion of their experiences is still forbidden. The bones of Jiabiangou’s “rightists” remain scattered in the desert. Their history offers one means of understanding present-day China: just across Gansu’s border lies Xinjiang, where, according to UN estimates, more than 1m Uyghurs and other minorities have been arrested for thought crimes and placed in labour camps. Tombstone: The Great Chinese Famine, 1958-1962. By Yang Jisheng. Translated by Guo Jian and Stacy Mosher. Farrar Straus and Giroux; 656 pages; $21. Penguin; £14.99 No one knows exactly how many people died during the “Great Leap Forward”, a disastrous period in Chinese history when Mao launched a plan to surpass the West through collectivised agriculture. The policies resulted in one of the deadliest famines ever known, with estimates of deaths ranging from 15m-55m. Yang Jisheng, a Chinese journalist whose father starved to death in 1959, puts the toll at 36m. In his harrowing book, Mr Yang uses his state media credentials to access official archives, where he spends years amassing evidence for this painstaking account of the famine. “A tombstone is memory made concrete,” Mr Yang writes. The English translation (the book was originally published in Hong Kong) is a condensed but still damning account of how the regime’s fanaticism spawned layers of lies, as officials confiscated starving villagers’ food and punished anyone who resisted. Saving face for the party became more important than stopping mass starvation. The book zooms in on individual towns and officials, then offers a bird’s-eye-view of a rotten system. In China today the time of famine is known as the years of “natural disaster”, as if nature, not the party, was to blame. Mr Yang’s book demolishes that lie. More Summer reads• How to watch the Tour de France from afar• A Nicaraguan writer reflects on exile from a dictatorship• The bitter truth behind Madagascar’s roaring vanilla trade• Our Bartleby columnist picks beach reads for business folk• Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya on why Europe will be safer if Belarus is free The Cowshed: Memories of the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Ji Xianlin. Translated by Chenxin Jiang. New York Review of Books; 216 pages; $18.95 and £15.99 In this first-person account of the Cultural Revolution, Ji Xianlin, a professor at Peking University, recounts how he was forced to live in a “cowshed”, a makeshift prison, on campus in the 1968. Marked as a class enemy because of his status as an intellectual, Ji was tortured by his students, whipped with a bike chain and subjected to months of hard labour. His is one of the most visceral accounts available of the pointless violence that Mao set off across China. Yet Ji does not address the reasons for the Cultural Revolution: his memoir is limited to his experiences and his shame at having survived. He is haunted by a saying⁠—that “the scholar can be killed, but he cannot be not humiliated”⁠—and suggests that his failure to commit suicide, as many intellectuals did, was dishonourable. His memoir was published in China in 1998 and is still available. His story reflects a particularly Chinese form of partially self-censored honesty: he admits that he persecuted others before he became a target. And he fears that younger generations will not know about this dark period. Yet he concludes with a dissonant declaration of confidence that Chinese civilisation is rising and will solve humanity’s biggest problems. The author has blind spots, but his book offers a rare window into his generation’s way of thinking. Bullets and Opium: Real-Life Stories of China After the Tiananmen Square Massacre. By Liao Yiwu. Translated by David Cowhig, Jessie Cowhig and Ross Perlin. Atria/One Signal Publishers; 320 pages; $30 and £25 Students from China’s top universities led the protests at Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989. But the majority of the protesters were ordinary Beijingers who did not have the opportunity to flee overseas after the massacre and brutal crackdown that followed the demonstrations. Many were imprisoned and forced to live in poverty as China’s economy soared in the 1990s and the government scrubbed memories of the politically heady 1980s from the collective consciousness. One of those people was Liao Yiwu, a poet who was jailed for four years for his condemnation of the killings. After his release in 1994, he scraped a living as a busker, where he developed his interest in life on the lower rungs of Chinese society. In “Bullets and Opium”, he chronicles the lives of idealists clutching on to the fast-vanishing world in which criticisms of the Party could be seen as patriotic rather than seditious. Mr Liao, who now lives in Berlin, delves into the psychological as well as social trauma suffered by his interviewees. He does not idealise them. Rather, he presents them in their painful and often ugly new realities. Eat the Buddha. By Barbara Demick. Random House; 352 pages; $18. Granta; £9.99 Few writers have done more to illuminate isolated parts of the world than Barbara Demick. After a book on the Bosnian War and another on North Korea, the former Beijing bureau chief for the Los Angeles Times turned to Ngaba, an isolated town on the eastern edge of the Tibetan plateau. It has the unlovely distinction of being the self-immolation capital of the world, where dozens of Tibetan monks have set themselves on fire since 2009 in protest at repressive Chinese rule. Ms Demick explores why it became such a centre for discontent. She delivers a riveting narrative account of Tibetans who have lived and died there, as well as those who have fled overseas. Access is severely restricted for foreign journalists, but Ms Demick snuck into Ngaba three times, giving the book vivid colour that is rare in contemporary accounts of Tibet. The Chinese government tries to portray Tibet as a region that has been lifted out of poverty through Communist Party policies, but Ms Demick shows a town that has enjoyed little of the wealth of neighbouring Han Chinese areas, and is riven with anxiety. “The level of fear among Tibetans is comparable to what I’ve seen in North Korea”, she writes. Beijing Comrades. By Bei Tong. Translated by Scott Myers. The Feminist Press; 256 pages; $16.95 Little is known about Bei Tong, the anonymous author of “Beijing Comrades”. The pseudonym riffs on the characters for “Beijing gay”, appropriate for the first piece of avant-garde gay fiction published online in Chinese. It appeared in 1998 and was serialised on a (now defunct) website, “Chinese Men’s and Boys’ Paradise”. Homosexuality had only been decriminalised the year before though it remained officially listed as a mental illness until 2001. The book is a snapshot of Beijing as it opened up following reforms in the early 1990s. It follows the fortunes of Handong, a princeling who obtains money and lovers. He picks up Lan Yu, a migrant worker, as a disposable plaything. Handong falls in love: a dangerous development for a man in his position. “Beijing Comrades” was re-released in translation by The Feminist Press, an American publishing house, in 2016. It depicts the corruption of the early reform period, both material and moral, as the Maoist structures that defined society gave way to capitalist excess. As a record of gay life in China at a time of no legal protection and scant social recognition, the book is unparalleled. ■_______________ Read more of our coverage on China’s complicated relationship with history, from Xi Jinping’s attempts to rewrite the past to the government’s politicisation of archeology. Do you have your own recommendations? Send them to summer@economist.com with the subject line “China’s secret histories” and your name, city and country. We will publish a selection of readers’ suggestions. More from The Economist reads:Our former Asia columnist recommends the best books about TaiwanSeven essential books about Hong KongOur Africa editor chooses five books, and one album, about AfricaOur food columnist selects the seven essential cookbooks