Making his way to the roof of the 13-storey Grand Hotel Pristina, Petrit Halilaj points out abandoned bedrooms piled high with junk. The artist climbs a spindly metal ladder, then stands amid the signage of this once five-star establishment. Manifesta, Europe’s nomadic art biennial, opened in Pristina, Kosovo’s capital, on July 22nd. As its centrepiece, Mr Halilaj has rearranged and added to the Grand’s lettering to broadcast a message of optimism: “Kur dielli të ikë, do ta pikturojmë qiellin” (“When the sun goes away, we paint the sky”). He has positioned 27 illuminated stars in a cascade around its façade (pictured, below). From here, you can see the whole of the city. Dilapidated structures from the Yugoslavian era dominate the view: the curious concrete angles of the Palace of Youth and Sports; the brutalist Rilindja newspaper printworks; and the chimneys of a vast former brick factory. The outer slopes of the capital are filled with new towers erected during an ill-regulated construction boom. Scattered throughout are patches of wasteland strewn with weeds and litter. Finding new purpose for this unappealing terrain became the focus of an urban research project conducted under the auspices of Manifesta 14 Pristina. Manifesta was imagined as an experimental art biennial in Europe after the cold war. When the first edition opened to the public in Rotterdam in 1996, the territories of the former Yugoslavia were in conflict. Now, more than two decades since the end of the Kosovo war, Pristina is the first city in the western Balkans to host the roving event. A lacklustre edition in 2016 in the Swiss city of Zürich prompted the directors of Manifesta to rethink. According to the old format, a starry curatorial team brought international artists to a place for a multi-venue exhibition, then departed after 100 days. This boosted tourism but there was little meaningful engagement with the host city. “In the biennial landscape you had this distinction between the global and the local—local artists were pushed into secondary position,” says Hedwig Fijen, the founder and director of Manifesta. By contrast, the Pristina edition is unusually local in focus: 40 of the 102 artists are of Kosovan descent. Two-thirds of all participants come from the western Balkans. Contributing to the long-term development of a host city is now one of Manifesta’s overarching goals. Ahead of the Palermo edition in 2018, oma, a firm co-founded by pioneering architect Rem Koolhaas, was invited to conduct a preliminary study of the host city, identifying issues of local concern. Manifesta was then built around these findings and the success of the Palermo biennial inspired a new approach. Ever since, Ms Fijen has been pondering “what difference a biennial can make and what it can do.” Of the €5m ($5.1m) budget for Pristina, 15% will be spent on urban projects (20% is allocated to artists’ commissions). Here, for the first time, Manifesta will leave a physical legacy: the crumbling Hivzi Sulejmani Library was renovated to become a small culture and education centre. Ms Fijen secured the lease for five years. “We wanted to start something that could continue in the long term: small interventions that, little by little, could become part of the city,” says Carlo Ratti, an Italian architect and engineer whose bureau was brought in to develop the urban programme. Through public consultation and by analysing public spaces in Pristina, Mr Ratti came up with a few subtle yet significant changes for the city. Most of Kosovo’s capital does not appear on Google Street View. So for three months last year, students studying architecture at the University of Pristina used GoPro cameras to build a visual map of their city. Next, artificial-intelligence tools developed by mit’s Senseable City Lab, where Mr Ratti is a director, were used to analyse the images. Why did certain spaces remain unused? Parked cars blocking access and fly-tipping were often to blame. Using yellow paint and street furniture, Mr Ratti’s team made their “small interventions”. A street lined with bustling cafés was pedestrianised. Cars were blocked from accessing the garden of the restored Hivzi Sulejmani Library, which was also replanted. All of these modifications are reversible but locals are invited to “vote with their feet”; to visit these spaces and determine which changes should become permanent. Mr Ratti hopes this model of urban design, which encourages residents to participate, “will be known as the ‘Pristina model’ for transformation”. Manifesta’s opening shindig was held at the brick factory, which “was a rubbish dump for decades”, says Perparim Rama, Pristina’s mayor, who is also an architect. He had it cleared at the biennial’s suggestion (pictured, top). Another clean-up was conducted along a stretch of disused railway between the old brickworks and the Palace of Youth and Sports, creating a 1.3km (nearly one mile) walkway. “Manifesta’s interventions are a test,” says Mr Rama, who sees Mr Ratti’s vision of participatory urbanism “as an opportunity to co-create the city”. The bigger question is whether the updates will endure once the biennial moves on. All this has stimulated plans for a contemporary-art museum in Pristina. Mr Halilaj, who became the first artist to represent Kosovo at the Venice Biennale in 2013, is on the development team and thinks an existing building should be chosen for the purpose: “For me, the number-one place to propose [as a gallery] is the Grand Hotel.” Associated both with wartime atrocities and peacetime pleasures, “it has the darkness and light of history embedded in its architecture”. ■