WHEN BORIS JOHNSON survived a vote of no confidence among Conservative MPs just under a month ago, he laid on the superlatives. More than 40% of his colleagues had voted to remove him as their leader and hence as Britain’s prime minister. Yet he called the result “extremely good, positive, conclusive, decisive”. Mr Johnson may have felt safe—and party rules say he cannot be challenged again for a year—but murmurs of rebellion continued nonetheless. Now, after the resignations of two senior ministers, Mr Johnson’s hold on his job looks as tenuous as ever. On July 5th Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the exchequer, or finance minister—the most powerful job bar the top one—and Sajid Javid, the health secretary, departed within minutes of each other. Several junior figures followed, among them Alex Chalk, the solicitor-general, and Bim Afolami, a vice-chair of the party, who in almost satirical spirit quit during an interview on TalkTV, a little-watched political television channel. Mr Johnson quickly replaced Mr Sunak with Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, and Mr Javid with Steve Barclay, a peripatetic loyalist who in his previous post was the prime minister’s chief of staff. Even so, few prime ministers would survive such a double blow, especially after the battering Mr Johnson has taken in recent months. How long he will be in office, no one knows. But his authority is chronically weakened. His latest troubles began on June 30th, when the Sun reported the sudden resignation of Chris Pincher, the Tories’ deputy chief whip—an enforcer of party discipline. He confessed to “having drunk far too much” and “embarrassed myself”, after accusations that he had groped two men at a Conservative club. Asked whether Mr Johnson knew of any concerns about Mr Pincher’s behaviour when appointing him in February, a Downing Street spokesman said no. That was later modified: the prime minister knew of no “specific” allegations. After the Sunday papers reported more claims of groping (denied by Mr Pincher), Downing Street said that Mr Johnson had in fact been aware of some allegations, but these had been “resolved” or had led nowhere. Only on July 5th—after the official account had been flatly contradicted by a former senior civil servant—did Mr Johnson admit that he had been told, in person, about a claim against Mr Pincher in 2019, when Mr Johnson was foreign secretary and Mr Pincher a junior minister in the Foreign Office. In hindsight, the prime minister said, he “bitterly regretted” having given Mr Pincher the whip’s job. For Messrs Javid and Sunak, that was apparently the last straw, even if neither mentioned the Pincher affair in their resignation letters. “The tone you set as a leader, and the values you represent, reflect on your colleagues, your party and ultimately the country,” Mr Javid wrote. Mr Sunak was similarly stinging: “[T]he public rightly expect government to be conducted properly, competently and seriously.” Mr Sunak also hinted at differences over fiscal policy. The ex-chancellor would rather be tighter-fisted with public money but “I have supported you publicly.” Lack of candour, even about a tawdry sexual scandal, should not by itself prompt the resignations of uninvolved senior ministers, let alone endanger a prime minister. But the events of the past week are just the latest to tarnish Mr Johnson’s three-year tenure. The most dangerous to his hold on office, until now, was “Partygate”—claims that officials in Downing Street, including Mr Johnson, repeatedly broke the government’s lockdown rules imposed during the covid-19 pandemic. Mr Johnson was fined, as were Mr Sunak and dozens of civil servants, after a police inquiry. A report by a senior civil servant, Sue Gray, described shameful scenes, including vomiting after officials held a late-night party and rudeness to cleaning staff. As in the Pincher affair, Downing Street officials and the prime minister changed their stories time and again about what went on and what he knew when. Mr Johnson is still to face a parliamentary inquiry into whether he knowingly misled the House of Commons—by the usual standards of British political honour, a resignation offence. After Partygate, enough Tory MPs were sufficiently disenchanted by the prime minister’s behaviour, chaotic administration and lack of frankness, and the resulting slide in their party’s popularity, to fear for their seats and call the confidence vote. Since Mr Johnson survived it, things have gone from bad to worse. Last month the Tories lost by-elections in Wakefield, in Yorkshire (one of many snatched from Labour in 2019), and Tiverton and Honiton, in rural Devon (where they had had a huge majority and which with its predecessors had been almost continuously Tory since 1885), both by wide margins. Both seats had been vacated because of sexual scandal. Wakefield’s ex-MP had been convicted of a sexual assault on a 15-year-old boy. Tiverton’s had been caught watching pornography on his mobile phone in the Commons chamber. Taint of sexual misbehaviour, in yet another form, has cost Mr Pincher his job. Failing to respond to it candidly may now cost the prime minister his. Yet it is not clear when, or even how. Mr Johnson still has his backers. They claim that he “got Brexit done” (though Britain’s exit from the EU still causes rancour, at home and abroad) and “got all the big calls right” during the pandemic, and point to his unstinting backing for Ukraine. Fed-up MPs may get another chance to vote Mr Johnson out, by changing the rules of the parliamentary party. Johnson-sceptics are expected to do well in elections to the rule-setting 1922 Committee of backbenchers, which are imminent. Perhaps more likely, support from other senior ministers may ebb away. Only one thing is sure: having craved the prime ministership all his life, Mr Johnson will not go willingly.■