For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter Gun violence seeps through all aspects of American life—even celebrations commemorating the country’s independence. Just as a Fourth of July parade began in a suburb of Chicago, a gunman opened fire from a rooftop. At least six people were killed and several more wounded. According to a database compiled by Mother Jones, a magazine, it was the sixth mass shooting in seven weeks; the seventh this year. (See chart.) About halfway through 2022, 51 people have already died in mass shootings, defined by the magazine as those that cause at least three fatalities, excluding the perpetrator. At this rate 2022 will be America’s second-deadliest year for such atrocities since at least 1982. (In 2017, the deadliest, 117 people were killed.) According to Gun Violence Archive, a non-profit research organisation which defines mass shootings as at least four injuries, there have been 309 so far this year. That is approaching an average of two a day. President Joe Biden once again expressed his dismay, saying he was “shocked by the senseless gun violence”. The carnage in Chicago comes little more than a month after a massacre in a school in Uvalde, Texas, which killed 19 children and two teachers. That prompted America’s most significant gun reforms in three decades, though they remain woefully inadequate. On June 23rd Mr Biden signed into law a package providing billions of dollars for mental-health services and school safety, as well as grants to help states pass and implement “red-flag” laws. These include enhancing background checks for gun buyers under 21. Yet progress remains piecemeal. On the day that the Senate approved the gun-control reform package, the Supreme Court struck down a New York state law that requires people in the state to obtain a licence if they want to carry a handgun outside their homes. There are also big differences in state laws. Illinois has the sixth-strictest gun-safety laws in America but is surrounded by states with much weaker ones. That makes it easier to traffic guns into the state. Despite the outrage that followed the massacre in Uvalde, public opinion had been moving against gun-control reform. According to a Gallup poll conducted in 2021, only 52% of Americans believed that the laws covering the sale of firearms should be made stricter, down from 67% in 2018. As the debate drags on, the bloodshed continues. ■