“Shall i compare thee to a summer’s day?” So begins one of the most famous poems in all of English literature. It is also one of the most frequently cited in usage books. Shakespeare’s “Sonnet XVIII” is offered as support for the notion that “compare to” means to express a likeness, whereas “compare with” is used for contrasts. But the picture is not simple. Shakespeare goes on to say that the woman he is addressing is “more lovely and more temperate” and that she, unlike a summer’s day, will never fade. Some commentators say, then, that the rhetorical question is meant to be answered with a “no”, because of the differences he then stresses. In that case, though, what follows is a textbook example of comparing her “with”, not “to”, a summer’s day. The guidebooks that simply cite the poem as illustrative of “compared to” have more explaining to do. Some readers will applaud the careful distinction of “compared to” and “compared with”. Or you may be hearing of this difference for the first time, despite being English-speakers and proficient readers. That is because it belongs to a category of distinctions in English that might be better understood as attempts at neatening the language than as long-standing, clear rules. “Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary of English Usage” examined many literary examples of “compare” followed by “with” and “to”. Its editors found that after the active form (compare) the distinction is kept more often than not, but scarcely uniformly. After the past participle (compared) the variation is in effect random. In the end, “The rule can be looked upon as a guide that you may choose to observe if you wish to. Many writers obviously do not.” Good usage gurus grasp that formulating neat rules can be tough. H.W. Fowler, one of Britain’s greatest, endorsed the compared to/with rule in his usage guide of 1926, but conceded that they are often hard to tease apart. Sometimes a comparison both draws a likeness and illustrates contrast, as Shakespeare’s does. The problem is that rules have a way of being simplified with repetition, until they wind up in a stark and simple form that conflicts with how the language actually works. Yet careful writers and keen readers know that some distinctions are genuinely vital, and that eroding these invites confusion. It is clear enough why people mix up flout and flaunt, including sensible writers who are in a hurry. Not only do they sound similar; both involve acting with a kind of insouciant brio. But if you flout the distinction, warns The Economist’s style guide, you risk appearing to flaunt your ignorance. Relaxed observers sometimes note that language changes, as though nothing can be done about that, and, since the process is natural, nothing should be attempted. But two distinct words collapsing into one really can rob the language of valuable subtlety. Using strategy for tactics—one is how you win a war, the other how you win a battle—should unsettle not only military experts. Even in metaphorical uses such as in politics, day-to-day skirmishes are different from the long-term plan. Some people are good tacticians and lousy strategists. It is true that if a change advances far enough, it is unlikely to be stopped. Further along that line is decimate, a word once meaning “to destroy a portion of” (or “a tenth of”), but now used as a synonym for annihilate. The distinction, if it can be kept, is useful, since there is no good synonym for the old decimate. Other changes in meaning may be almost complete: though celibate once meant “unmarried”, it is so much more often used to mean “abstaining from sex” that many people are surprised to learn the original meaning. In any case, “unmarried” does the old job just fine. Holding out for the original “celibacy” is quixotic. So when examining a proposed fine distinction in the language, it is worth remembering a trio of criteria: it should be clear-cut, long-standing and useful. Commentators have proposed rules rigidly separating that from which, among from between, for from because and more than from over (among many others). But in these cases, actual practice has been a jumble over time, because the meanings are so close, and because the proposed distinctions add so little value in clarity. Some rules separating words really are critical—but they must earn their keep. Which are which can be hard to tell. But if you can take the time to distinguish compared to from compared with, discerning those rules worth fighting for is surely worth the effort too. Read more from Johnson, our columnist on language:The everyday miracle of writing (Jul 30th)Far be it from the English to use the subjunctive (Jul 16th)Some languages pay closer attention to family ties than others (Jun 2nd)