IN THE EARLY hours of July 6th the city of Elberton in rural Georgia was rocked by an explosion. Someone had damaged the nearby Georgia Guidestones, a landmark often called “America’s Stonehenge”. Authorities have since demolished the remnants of the monument because of safety concerns. A week after the bombing, no suspect has been identified; only a grainy video of someone apparently leaving an explosive device at the site has been circulated. A local prosecutor described it as an “act of domestic terrorism”. What were the Georgia Guidestones, and why might they have been attacked? In the late 1970s a man using the pseudonym Robert C. Christian commissioned the Guidestones on behalf of a “small group of loyal Americans who believe in God”. Altogether the six granite slabs stood roughly 19 feet (5.8 metres) tall and served as a sundial and astronomical calendar. The stones were etched with messages in a dozen languages, including English and Babylonian cuneiform. Many conspiracy theorists have pointed to their commandment-like inscriptions, such as the instruction to “Maintain humanity under 500,000,000 in perpetual balance with nature”, as evidence of a shadowy cabal that controls the world. Others simply admired the enormous landmark as a testament to the craftsmen of the “granite capital of the world”, as Elberton proclaims itself, while still others saw the stones as a wacky roadside attraction that drew thousands of visitors to quiet Elberton every year. The Guidestones had long been shrouded in mystery and controversy. In 2008 and 2014 they were was defaced with messages alluding to the “New World Order”, a conspiracy theory with anti-Semitic origins that claims that a group of elites is trying to control the world’s population. But the monument gained renewed attention earlier this year when a gubernatorial hopeful made destroying the “satanic” stones one of her campaign promises. Kandiss Taylor ultimately lost the Republican primary in May with just 3.4% of the vote. After news of the stones’ destruction emerged, Ms Taylor tweeted, “God is God all by Himself. He can do ANYTHING He wants to do. That includes striking down Satanic Guidestones.” And she is not the only Republican politician to subscribe to sinister notions surrounding the Guidestones. In an interview with Alex Jones, an internet purveyor of bogus theories, Marjorie Taylor Greene, a congresswoman from Georgia, said the stones called for “population control”, a policy she linked to the “hard left”. It is unclear whether the bomber of the Guidestones bought into such fantasies but it is troubling that politicians increasingly seem to. Beliefs in different conspiracy theories “tend to go hand-in-hand,” says Kelly Garrett, a professor of communications at Ohio State University. Questionable ideas are continuously surfacing in the run-up to America’s mid-term elections in November. Americans should worry more about their spread than whatever was written on Georgia’s spooky stones. More from The Economist explains:How is the Supreme Court changing the law of religious liberty in America?Could artificial intelligence become sentient?What is stagflation, and might it make a comeback?