Eighty years ago Eric Ravilious disappeared while on duty as an official war artist; he was part of a crew looking for a missing Lockheed Hudson aircraft. The fearless Ravilious had already seen plenty of action before his last fatal mission. His watercolours and prints of aircraft carriers illuminated by gunfire, or of the claustrophobic world of the navy’s submariners, were familiar to many in wartime Britain. Ravilious was one of the first names on the list when the war artists’ scheme was conceived at the beginning of the second world war by Kenneth Clark, then the director of the National Gallery. Ravilious would be the first of only three British war artists to be killed during the conflict, at the age of just 39. At the time he was beginning to build a reputation as a significant talent, but in the subsequent decades he almost vanished without trace. His wife, Tirzah, was left short of money and died of cancer just nine years later, leaving their three children bereft. By contrast, friends and contemporaries—such as Henry Moore, a fellow war artist and sculptor—became household names. But the anniversary of his death in September also draws attention to a remarkable revival, mostly since the beginning of the 21st century. Earlier in the year there was a major show of his work at the Arc Gallery in Winchester, and on July 1st the first documentary about his life and work was released, “Eric Ravilious - Drawn to War”. In the film Ai Weiwei, a Chinese dissident artist, and Grayson Perry, a British ceramicist, among others, discuss his appeal. Ravilious’s images now adorn tea towels and mugs. Having died young, he did not produce a huge number of paintings and so work rarely comes up for auction. In 2014 a watercolour that had been in the same private collection since 1939 sold for £242,500 ($294,700) at Christie’s—a sum comparable to those fetched by J.M.W. Turner for similar work. More recently, a small wood engraving of a crowing rooster in a landscape, designed for a publishing house called the Golden Cockerel Press, sold for £6,400, a record for one of Ravilious’s woodcuts. With the benefit of hindsight, it is not difficult to see why Ravilious languished in semi-obscurity for so long. Born in 1903 in Acton, a dowdy suburb of west London, he remained steadfastly unfashionable for most of his life. Although he studied at the Royal College of Art—where he was taught by Paul Nash, an important influence—thereafter he rarely lived in London, let alone any other metropolis, preferring to hole up in the more remote parts of Essex and Sussex. This meant he was never part of any of the schools or movements that shaped his contemporaries; after his death there was no one to truly champion him. His choices of medium and subject matter were equally untrendy. Ravilious was a master of wood engraving and achieved his most famous results in watercolour. Yet watercolour was widely regarded as a medium for amateurs compared with the majesty of oils and collage (despite the fact that it takes more skill to marshal the quicksilver flow of watercolour than heavier, malleable oils). He was also, primarily, a landscape painter, fascinated, most of all, by the undulating downs of his youth in east Sussex and other scenes from the countryside, at a time when most of his contemporaries were pushing on from Cubism towards Abstract Expressionism. He decorated ceramics for Wedgwood in the later 1930s, producing extremely popular “Alphabet” and “Garden” mugs. These were cherished by ordinary people but not by the art establishment. He thus had to wait until the influence of modernism had waned to be rediscovered. In this respect, argues Margy Kinmonth, the director of “Drawn to War”, Ravilious’s artistic fortunes resemble those of L.S. Lowry, another idiosyncratic artist. Ravilious was first rehabilitated through his war work, the subject of a big retrospective at the Imperial War Museum in 2003. His designs for Wedgwood have remained admired, as have many of his woodcut designs. Thousands of readers around the world will be familiar with the logo on the cover of Wisden Cricketers’ Almanack, depicting a pair of players in stovepipe hats. Few, however, will know it is by Ravilious. But he is most revered by fellow artists and writers for his landscapes. Because Ravilious specialised in the quintessential English subjects of chalk and countryside, hearth and cottage, he has sometimes been romanticised as a very English, even nationalistic, painter. Yet Ravilious’s work is much more interesting than that, for there is nothing picturesque or jingoistic, let alone comforting, about any of his landscapes. As Robert Macfarlane, a writer and academic, argues, his scenes are unsettling and eerie. With very few people in his watercolours, they are “evacuated landscapes”; the eye settles instead on barbed wire, telegraph poles and waterwheels. These are exactly the elements that have drawn contemporary artists to Ravilious, including Stanley Donwood, a collaborator of the band Radiohead. “I’d like to completely absorb whatever it was that he had so that I could do it,” says Mr Donwood. The realm of Ravilious is not the England of Morris Dancers and country pubs, but of ancient hills scarred by modern life. That is why he can seem more relevant today than some of his modernist rivals. ■ “Eric Ravilious - Drawn to War” is screening in British cinemas now