In the end the mighty ex-military man cut a pathetic figure. First Gotabaya Rajapaksa fled the official presidential residence before it was taken over by tens of thousands of angry Sri Lankans who had come to Colombo on July 9th to chase him from office. Then he spent days in hiding to avoid their wrath. Finally, in the early hours of July 13th the disgraced president was spirited out of the country on a military jet. Gota, as he is known, flew to Malé, the capital of the Maldives, but was reportedly set to travel on to another country later in the day. Gota’s dead-of-night departure marks the end of his family’s two-decade dominance of politics on the island of 22m people. Most Sri Lankans considered it long past time. But it also leaves the country with a political vacuum. Ranil Wickremesinghe, the prime minister who has taken charge in the president’s absence, is deeply unpopular and tainted by his association with the Rajapaksa clan. Any government he cobbles together may not last long enough to complete negotiations with the IMF and international creditors that aim to resolve Sri Lanka’s devastating economic crisis. The situation is complicated by the president’s unwillingness to relinquish power even from without. Gota used his executive powers to commandeer the plane that took him to the Maldives, and did not resign, or make arrangements for his resignation, before fleeing, presumably to avoid losing his immunity from prosecution. (He has been accused of corruption in presiding over Sri Lanka’s economic collapse and of crimes committed during the country’s 26-year civil war, both of which he denies.) He has not spoken in public since leaving his residence on July 8th. A promise that he would resign by July 13th was relayed through the speaker of Parliament, a political ally. So far, Gota has failed to make good on it. On the afternoon of July 13th Mr Wickremesinghe, now acting as president, declared a nationwide state of emergency and imposed a curfew in Western Province, which includes Colombo. The speaker issued a statement that the president had appointed Mr Wickremesinghe to act in his stead while he was overseas, suggesting that Gota may not in fact be planning to resign. Even though the speaker later assured the public that he would, that is unlikely to go down well with Sri Lankans. Initial reports that the prime minister had taken over and imposed a curfew sparked angry outbursts on social media and further protests in Colombo and elsewhere. Security forces met them with tear gas and batons. Mr Wickremesinghe will attempt to form an all-party government that can take over day-to-day running of the country until elections can be held. It will also manage negotiations with the IMF, where striking a deal is a matter of urgency. Sri Lanka defaulted on its foreign debt in May. It has no foreign currency to pay for imports, resulting in an acute shortage of fuel, food and medicines. Fuel is being rationed to preserve essential services, and private buyers are able to buy only limited quantities for which they have to wait days. There is still not enough for farmers to deliver food to cities, or for doctors to reach hospitals. Yet the country may not achieve sufficient political stability soon enough to make progress on a deal. The presidential secretariat and the prime minister’s official residence (which protesters stormed over the weekend) remain unsecured and have become places of social-media pilgrimage; people are taking selfies in the president’s pool and office. Worryingly, Marxist radical groups are beginning to dominate the protests, and Gota’s refusal to go for good is only likely to accelerate such radicalisation. Instead of restoring calm, Mr Wickremesinghe may find himself presiding over a country descending into anarchy.■