BORIS JOHNSON’S promise to stand down as leader of the Conservative Party and Britain’s prime minister has brought into the open the behind-the-scenes jostling to take his place. Britain can change its prime minister without the bother of a general election. Indeed, that is quite common. After Theresa May resigned between elections in 2019, Mr Johnson saw off other Tories to succeed her, as Mrs May did after David Cameron quit three years before. The leader who can command a majority in the House of Commons is asked by the queen to form a government, however they end up in that position. The Conservatives retain a sizeable majority, so whoever wins the leadership of the party will also govern the country. How will that leadership election work? Candidates must be a Conservative MP, and be nominated by at least eight colleagues. (There is nothing to stop Mr Johnson from standing again, though he would almost certainly lose.) Party rules set out two stages of the competition. First, candidates vie for the approval of fellow Tory MPs. In consecutive rounds of voting, the candidate in last place is eliminated each time, until only two remain. Their names are then put forward to the roughly 180,000 members of the party. These happy few then decide who gets the job. The contest that took Mr Johnson to power lasted around two months. Some ministers and MPs have made it plain that they want to see the back of him much earlier. On July 7th Sir John Major, a former party leader and prime minister, suggested that the rules could revert to the old system—under which he succeeded Margaret Thatcher in 1990—by which only MPs pick the new leader, thus saving time. The details of the contest will only become clear after the 1922 Committee of backbench MPs meets on July 11th, but such a drastic change to the rules seems unlikely. No matter when the voting takes place, however, the starting gun has already been fired. Suella Braverman, the attorney-general, and Tom Tugendhat, a backbencher who is chairman of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, have already said they will run. Expect more hopefuls to pipe up during the coming days. ■