For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter The shock caused in part by Russia’s war in Ukraine will transform the global energy industry. Governments in the West are looking to end their reliance on Russian oil and gas, which is giving a boost to climate-friendly alternatives. They include nuclear-power plants. Some countries, notably including Germany, remain fearful of another Chernobyl or Fukushima. But even when accounting for the high-profile disasters, nuclear power is very safe (see chart). A terawatt-hour (TWh) of electricity from nuclear energy is associated with 0.03 deaths (including indirect deaths from disasters and workplace accidents at the plants). That makes it even safer than wind energy, which is associated with 0.04 deaths per TWh, mostly from accidents during the installation process, drownings on offshore sites and helicopter collisions with turbines. Only solar energy is less deadly than nuclear. Coal is the deadliest because of the air pollution it causes: one TWh is linked to 24.6 deaths. As a rule, the safest energy sources are also the greenest. Nuclear energy produces just four tonnes of greenhouse gases per gigawatt-hour of electricity (GWh), the same as wind energy (this includes emissions from the mining of fuels, transportation and maintenance of a plant). Despite this, nuclear energy used for electricity production has been in decline since 2001 and now only accounts for a tenth of the global total. Fossil fuels still produce most of the world’s electricity: coal, gas and oil made up around 62% last year. The share of renewables has been growing over the last decade, yet wind energy makes up just 7% of the total and solar energy 4%.  Nuclear energy has had an image problem for some time. Major accidents have made it seem more deadly than it is and the storage of nuclear waste remains controversial. But attitudes are shifting. Germany had planned to turn off its remaining three nuclear plants by the end of the year. Now, amid concerns about the country’s dependence on Russian gas and soaring energy prices, its government appears to be re-considering. Britain is constructing its first new nuclear plant in more than two decades. And in France, the government is set to pay €9.7bn ($9.9bn) to fully nationalise Électricité de France, one of the world’s biggest energy suppliers, to help fund six new nuclear reactors. Nuclear appears to be back in vogue. ■