MARIO DRAGHI, who for the past 17 months has led an improbably broad coalition government, was this week the guest at a dinner of its foreign press association—an occasion for banter as much as reflection. The joke that prompted him to laugh most heartily came from the association’s Turkish president, Esma Cakir. The parties in his government, she quipped, were just like the members of her association: “They all speak different languages.” As he was being driven to the presidential palace in Rome to submit his resignation on July 14th, Mr Draghi had reason to muse on the aptness of that remark. The senators of the Five Star Movement (M5S), the party in his coalition with the second-biggest representation in parliament, had earlier refused to support a motion of confidence in his government. The motion was intended to force through a package of measures to counter the effects of the energy crisis. The Five Stars argued that it was too modest. But the party objected in particular to the funding of a waste-to-energy plant for Rome that was judged to be less green than possible alternatives. Their boycott pitched Italy into a renewed bout of political uncertainty that became yet more uncertain when the president, Sergio Mattarella, rejected Mr Draghi’s resignation. The turmoil comes against a background of rising inflation, a continuing pandemic and the threat of an end to Russian gas supplies. Political upheaval could also jeopardise Italy’s efforts to secure its giant share of the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund (worth more than €200bn). Even with the reassuring Mr Draghi, a former European Central Bank president, in office, investors were fretting over Italy’s daunting public debts (currently standing at more than 150% of GDP) and demanding ever-greater returns for holding its government’s bonds. On June 30th the yield on Italy’s benchmark 10-year bonds hit 3.47%, the highest since 2014. Political instability risks increasing borrowing costs still further. And that in turn could project tremors into the currency markets where the euro is already under severe pressure. Mr Mattarella’s decision was understandable: the vote in the Senate showed that, even without the Five Stars, the government had a majority. It secured 172 votes in the 321-member upper house. The president was, in effect, asking Mr Draghi to go back to parliament to test his support and continue in office or form a new coalition. The risks of that for Mr Draghi are considerable. If the M5S remains on board, he will find himself the skipper of a crew in which some of the sailors have reserved a right to mutiny from time to time. Without them, one of the remaining parties may sooner or later be tempted to follow their example and jump ship. By next spring at the latest, Italy has to hold a general election, and it is easier to hustle for votes in opposition than while constrained by the responsibilities of government. The Northern League would be particularly likely to depart. It has watched its support drain away to another hard-right party, the Brothers of Italy, ever since the Brothers cannily chose to eschew Mr Draghi’s national unity government. But if a new or reset cabinet is an unattractive prospect for Mr Draghi, neither of the alternatives looks particularly promising for Italy or Europe. One is an early election that could not be held before the end of September. The other is a stop-gap government under a less authoritative figure than the man whose defence of the single currency in 2012 led to him being dubbed “Super Mario”. As this latest, more-than-usually baffling Italian crisis unfolded, one of Mr Draghi’s predecessors, the European Commissioner Paolo Gentiloni, said that he and his colleagues were viewing events from Brussels with “concerned amazement”. They will not be alone. ■