THE RACE to develop a vaccine against covid-19 was a matter of life and death. A recent study found that in 2021, 20m lives were saved by the jabs. Researchers at Airfinity, a life-sciences data firm, have used those numbers—along with data on which shots were most widely administered in each country—to estimate which one averted most deaths. Airfinity found that more than half of lives saved around the world could be attributed to just two vaccines, which shared first place: AstraZeneca-Oxford and Pfizer-BioNTech. Each averted between 5m and 7m deaths (because of the considerable uncertainty, The Economist deemed this a statistical tie). In third spot was the Sinovac vaccine (sometimes known as CoronoVac), at approximately 1.7m-2.2m lives saved, closely followed by Moderna at 1.5m-2m. To estimate how many lives each type of vaccine had saved, Airfinity drew on a recent study by epidemiologists at Imperial College London. This study estimated the number of deaths averted in the first year of vaccination, which started on December 8th 2020. The company’s researchers then distributed these lives saved between jabs. To do so they relied on each vaccine’s share of inoculations by country by the time the study ended. They also accounted for slight differences in their efficacy at preventing death, as shown in clinical trials. In doing so, they made several assumptions. First, that when a country had offered multiple types of jabs, these had been administered at similar times. In fact, this was not always the case. In Britain, for instance, inoculations were initially all delivered with Pfizer-BioNTech’s vaccine, and only later included those of Moderna and AstraZeneca-Oxford. Nor did Airfinity account for the fact that certain vaccines were given disproportionately to more vulnerable groups in a given country (such as the very old), which might have led to their saving more lives. The study that Airfinity built on excluded China, where fewer data are available, as well as tiny countries with a population of less than 90,000. That suggests that all numbers should be a bit higher, and especially those for the Chinese jabs—though the limited spread of the virus in China also means the impact of their absence from the study is not as great as it might have been. That AstraZeneca-Oxford and Pfizer-BioNTech emerged as the leaders by the end of 2021 should come as no surprise. Both ramped up production early, and by the end of the study period had by far the most doses administered outside China, at about 2bn and 1.5bn shots respectively. Moreover, many of their jabs went to older populations which were especially vulnerable to covid. These numbers only show deaths averted by the end of 2021. Vaccines continue to save lives, and have allowed most countries to return to a semblance of pre-pandemic normalcy. In the race to develop covid jabs, at least 20m spectators and their loved ones have been the ultimate winners. ■