This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. Mexicans elected Andrés Manuel López Obrador, or amlo, as president in 2018 because they wanted change. Criminal gangs control swathes of territory and violence remains at shockingly high levels. Corruption is rife. Economic growth languishes. This is despite the fact that Mexico, an emerging economy, has many things going for it, from car manufacturing to a vibrant cultural and culinary scene. So far, the president has failed to address the country’s problems since coming to office. As is to be expected, the most up-to-date books on Mexico are published in Spanish. But this selection will help English-readers understand the country’s challenges and give pointers on how it could develop. Unmasked: López Obrador and the End of Make-Believe. By Luis Rubio. Wilson Center; 130 pages This study of Mexican politics was published in 2019, a year after amlo came to office (download here). Read it more as a guide to how and why he won election, rather than as an assessment of his time as president. In his campaign amlo generated great public support by challenging a previously dominant idea that incremental change in Mexico would bring progress. His promise of radical improvements in cutting poverty, reducing inequality and violence all sounded appealing. Luis Rubio, a political scientist, suggests amlo would either transform the country as he promised, or lead it into crisis. Sadly, the second path is being followed: wrong-headed policies and the president’s stubborn refusal to drop pet projects have, in many ways, made Mexicans’ lives worse. Mexico: Biography of Power. By Enrique Krauze. Harper Perennial; 896 pages; $23.99 Mexico is not alone in feeling the weight of history as it struggles to cope with its current problems. The effects of Spanish colonisation still reverberate. The Mexican Revolution and the caudillos that followed also had their consequences. This book of history by a leading intellectual, published in 1997, offers an excellent jumping-off point for a new reader. Turn to it for portraits of influential individuals (hence the title “Biography of Power”) as well as broad landscapes of the country’s past. The book sheds light on Mexico’s difficulties in becoming a full democracy. More Summer reads• How to watch the Tour de France from afar• What if the Ottoman Empire had not collapsed?• In praise of mass-market American tacos• Our Bartleby columnist picks beach reads for business folk• The long and tangled history of California’s eucalyptus trees The Labyrinth of Solitude and Other Writings. By Octavio Paz. Translated by Lysander Kemp, Yara Milos and Rachel Phillips Belash. Grove Atlantic; 408 pages; $17. Penguin; £14.99 To zoom in on Mexico’s people, try this book by Octavio Paz, a Nobel prize-winning author and poet. Although his collection of essays is seven decades old, Paz’s observations remain relevant today. It is best known for the questions he asks about a quest for a national identity and about the psyche of Mexicans. One theme he explores is mestizaje, the fusion of indigenous and Spanish influences that Mexicans consider to be the foundation of their culture. It is a poignant topic as the current administration tries to empower long-marginalised indigenous folk. Paz also looks at the relationship between Mexico and the United States, and notes how many Mexicans’ sense of their own national identity is shaped by the big neighbour to the north. El Narco. by Ioan Grillo. Bloomsbury; 336 pages; $18 and £12.99 Over 30,000 people are murdered each year in Mexico. Police officers and local officials are routinely among those killed. Many victims simply disappear, although mass graves are also often uncovered. Ioan Grillo, a journalist based in Mexico City, shines a light on the criminal groups responsible for much of the carnage. His book explores how the drug gangs of the past have multiplied and mutated into diverse enterprises. Today they do everything from smuggling people across the northern border to controlling avocado farms. This all threatens Mexico and its democracy, and has repercussions and influences elsewhere, including in South America where Mexican gangs also operate. Yet it is the huge demand for illicit drugs in America that fuels much of this activity. The Story of My Teeth. By Valeria Luiselli. Translated by Christina MacSweeney. Coffee House Press; 192 pages; $16.95. Granta; £8.99 Patriarchal as Mexico may be, women are now represented at all levels of politics, business and culture. Valeria Luiselli is one of a group of female Mexican authors causing excitement—with justification. (Guadalupe Nettel is another.) A good place to dip into modern Mexican fiction is Ms Luiselli’s second novel, published in 2013 and released in English two years later. It won many accolades and been nominated for prizes. It is about a bon vivant who auctions off teeth supposedly once in the mouths of various famous figures in literature and history. As well as being a funny read, it gives readers a snapshot of Mexico City’s industrial suburbs, where much of it is set. Signs Preceding the End of the World. By Yuri Herrera. Translated by Lisa Dillman. And Other Stories; 128 pages; £8.99 Since 1965 at least 16m Mexicans have crossed the border to the United States, influencing the cultures on both sides of the border. In the past two decades more Mexicans returned than left, thanks largely to the ageing of the Mexican population and better economic opportunities at home. But over the past couple of years the number has been rising again, in part because of the pandemic and its economic effects. Plenty of academic and journalistic books about the migration north exist. But this short novel about the journey north of a young woman is a particularly moving read. The author is himself a Mexican living in the United States. Like Water for Chocolate. By Laura Esquivel. Translated by Carol and Thomas Christensen. Penguin Random House; 256 pages; $16.95. Transworld; £9.99 Understanding food is essential for understanding Mexico. Consider the importance of comidas—big lunches—with family and friends, or the role of the humble taco as a quick and cheap meal for workers. This book is a bestselling novel from 1989 (which was also turned into a film in 1992) that is both a fabulous read and a window into national cuisine. The tale concerns a family of women and the attempt by the youngest daughter, Tita, to use food to win back her lover, who has married her sister. Each chapter starts with a recipe for a traditional dish. Fifth Sun: A New History of the Aztecs. By Camilla Townsend. Oxford University Press; 336 pages; $29.95 and £14.99 The Aztecs inform Mexico’s sense of identity today, from symbols to names of places. For example, the image on the Mexican flag of an eagle standing on a prickly-pear cactus comes from a legend that the Aztecs decided to found their capital, Tenochtitlan, at the place where they saw this scene. This book, by a historian at Rutgers University, portrays the Aztecs not from the usual perspective of the Spanish but from that of the indigenous population, using sources in Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs. It turns out that the Aztecs weren’t quite as brutal as their reputation for human sacrifice would suggest. ■_______________ Our correspondent took a deep look at the first half of AMLO’s administration in this briefing. She has also written about Mexican migration, and on the tragedy of Mexico’s 100,000 disappeared people. Do you have your own recommendations? Send them to summer@economist.com with the subject line “Mexico” and your name, city and country. We will publish a selection of readers’ suggestions. More from The Economist reads:Our former Moscow correspondent picks seven books on Vladimir PutinOur obituaries editor chooses the five best biographies ever writtenWe pick five books on football and why it mattersOur food columnist selects the seven essential cookbooks