This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. FEW THINGS in the American West feel more omnipresent than the threat of wildfire in summer and autumn. Highway signs inform passers-by of daily changes in the degree of fire risk. Law enforcement officials urge neighbourhood pyromaniacs to be careful when setting off fireworks each Fourth of July, lest one spark an uncontrollable blaze. Smoke dirties the air and, sometimes, gives the sky an apocalyptic orange glow. Wildfires are a natural part of the landscape in the West. But climate change has further dehydrated an arid region, priming forests to burn. The following books—and one podcast—help to explain the dryness of the West, the evolution of America’s relationship to fire, and the ways in which bad policy and planning have put growing numbers of people in harm’s way. Cadillac Desert: The American West and its Disappearing Water. By Marc Reisner. Penguin; 672 pages; $20. Vintage; £14 It is hard to understand wildfires in the western states without first learning about the arid nature of the region. There remains no better book on water in the West than Marc Reisner’s “Cadillac Desert”, from 1986. It is a sprawling history of how the Bureau of Reclamation made the modern West possible by erecting a vast network of dams, reservoirs and pipelines to carry water from wet places to dry ones. But the bureau’s frenetic construction enabled the overuse of western rivers by cities and farms, and so further parched the landscape. Water policy can be impenetrable. Yet Reisner brings the complicated story to life by introducing readers to characters such as the “Renaissance man” who explored the length of the Colorado River, and the politicians who stole the water that allowed Los Angeles to blossom. The Dreamt Land: Chasing Water and Dust Across California. By Mark Arax. Knopf; 576 pages; $18 Fans of “Cadillac Desert” will find “The Dreamt Land” to be a worthy sequel—of sorts. Where Reisner’s opus roams across the West, Mark Arax focuses on water in his native California. The book, published in 2019, is part history, part memoir. Mr Arax painstakingly details the transformation of California’s Central Valley from a semi-arid land into an agricultural empire, while imbuing the story with tales of his grandfather’s grape farm and the progress of his own apricot trees. Both books make clear how drought, and western settlers’ attempts to out-manoeuvre drought, have defined the region in modern times. Fireline. A podcast from Montana Public Radio For those interested in wildfires but not sure where to start, Montana Public Radio’s six-episode series is an illuminating look at the many facets of fire. Learn how Native Americans rejuvenated forests and grasslands for millennia by practising controlled burns. Hear about a catastrophic megafire in 1910, known as “The Big Blowup”, which led officials to implement a policy of total fire suppression, allowing forests to become dangerously overgrown. The host of the series, Justin Angle, coaxes listeners to rethink their negative conceptions about fire by talking to ecologists who study how humans first tried to tame flames for cooking and warmth. The podcast is also revelatory in that it focuses mainly on Montana and the Northern Rockies, rather than the megafires that wreak havoc on the west coast. More Summer reads• How to do the most good possible• What if the Ottoman Empire had not collapsed?• In praise of mass-market American tacos• Our Bartleby columnist picks beach reads for business folk• An exploration of the discoveries unfolded through Origami Paradise: One Town’s Struggle to Survive an American Wildfire. By Lizzie Johnson. Crown; 432 pages; $28 The fire that destroyed Paradise, California in 2018 was the deadliest and costliest blaze in the Golden State’s history. The Camp Fire, as the conflagration is known, killed 85 people and destroyed nearly 19,000 structures. Lizzie Johnson wrote about the fire and its aftermath for the San Francisco Chronicle before turning the saga into a book. “Paradise” will haunt readers with its grim descriptions of residents trying to evacuate before flames swallow their town. As the death toll indicates, not everyone escapes. The book is also a useful guide to who is to blame for the destruction in Paradise and elsewhere. Climate change is one culprit. But decisions by bosses at utilities, local officials and residents have helped to turn towns into tinderboxes. The Worst Hard Time. By Timothy Egan. HarperCollins; 352 pages; $16.99 Some residents of Paradise decided to resettle elsewhere, rather than rebuild their homes. This trickling exodus from fire-prone lands is climate migration on a micro level. But it is far from the first time that extreme weather has uprooted Americans in the West. Timothy Egan’s book, from 2006, takes readers back to a time when relentless winds chased people off the Great Plains. Like wildfires and drought, the Dust Bowl was a product of the environment and bad policy. Boosters of Manifest Destiny encouraged farmers to settle the West with promises that the arid land would turn fertile under their care—that “rain follows the plow”. Instead, farmers endured dust storms made worse by their collective decision to tear up the “world’s greatest grassland”. The winds lifted the tilled soil into the air and blew it across the high plains. More than 300,000 “Okies” who fled the “dusters” would end up in California—perhaps in a town like Paradise. ■ Read (and listen) to more from our American West correspondent, including this article on the causes and effects of a shrinking Colorado River, and this podcast that explores how the West is reckoning with heatwaves, drought and fire—even as more Americans are moving to the region. More from The Economist reads:Our senior economics writer on what to read to understand the history of Western capitalismOur Rome correspondent on the books needed to understand ItalyOur former Asia columnist picks the best books about TaiwanOur obituaries editor chooses the five best biographies ever written