A swamp’s beauty is not obvious. Everything undulates; air hangs damp and heavy; water and sky share the same muted colours, punctuated by trees that look exhausted by their own weight. Marsh is little better: a mosaic of water and grassland leading finally to the sea. No imaginative leap is required to understand how the Great Dismal Swamp that spans Virginia and North Carolina got its name. There, as in the miles of salt marshes strung along the coast, visitors are beset by insects, snakes and occasionally alligators. After wading through the mire in North Carolina, one author reckoned in 1805 that “no condition of the Earth’s surface [was] more wild and irreclaimable than this.” This appealed to some. From the early 1600s these spaces between American land and sea harboured fugitives, freed slaves and runaways. To this day the Danube Delta is inhabited by the Lipovan, Orthodox Christians who fled Russia when they disagreed with changes to the Orthodox liturgy in the 17th century. “People are driven there out of necessity,” says Tom Blass, who recently wrote a travel book about swamps. “Either taking shelter or taking advantage of opportunities that nobody else wants.” Today more herons than hideaways cluster near these brackish waters. Yet “Where the Crawdads Sing” (pictured), Delia Owens’s debut novel of 2018, refutes the idea that wetlands are nothing more than a refuge for desperate souls. The delicate Bildungsroman, which featured in bestseller lists for two years after it was published, has recently been adapted into a film starring Daisy Edgar-Jones (who previously starred in “Normal People”). The story revolves around Kya, who finds solace in the swamp’s roving skies and gulls after she is abandoned by her family, local townspeople and the two men who claim to love her. She seeks sanctuary in North Carolina’s isolated marsh which, readers are told, “became her mother”. An episode from the real-life past casts a pall over “Where the Crawdads Sing”. The plot, which begins and ends with a murder, shares uncomfortable parallels with the killing of an unidentified man, allegedly a poacher, which took place in 1995 in Zambia, where Ms Owens and her then-husband were working as conservationists. The Zambian government wants to question the two of them; they have not returned to Zambia since 1996 and deny any involvement. Still, the saga has not put audiences off; nor have reviews decrying the film’s shallow characterisation and tendency to glide over social injustice. Directed by Olivia Newman and produced by Reese Witherspoon, it made $17m on its opening weekend in America. So it should succeed in awakening new audiences to the wetlands’ quiet beauty. Sweeping cinematography reveals sprawling waterways twisting languorously through Louisiana, where it was filmed. The movie opens with a bird’s-eye view—that of a great blue heron—emphasising the majesty of this wilderness for its inhabitants. Both versions of “Where the Crawdads Sing” are a timely reimagining of an ecosystem in rapid decline. In the 17th century America had more than 894,000km2 (345,175 square miles) of wetlands—an area bigger than that of Texas and Louisiana combined. By 1990 more than half had been lost to dumping, draining, filling and other forms of development. Globally the picture is grim: one study reported that more than a third of wetlands were degraded or destroyed between 1970 and 2015. This is bad news for the fight against climate change. Freshwater wetlands support nearly 40% of all species and these ecosystems are some of the most efficient carbon-capture devices on the planet. Coastal wetlands such as mangroves sequester carbon up to 55 times faster than tropical rainforests. They also protect vulnerable shorelines from storms. “A lot of their ecology is hidden…but it’s rich with life,” says Joseph Gordon, who works on coastal conservation for Pew Charitable Trusts in England. “They will thrive or they will die depending on the actions we take now.” Some of those actions are creative: artists are reappraising wetlands’ concealed beauty and ecological importance. Inside the Chilean pavilion at the Venice Biennale, scenes of the peatlands in Patagonia flicker across a gossamer-thin screen. The installation serves as a material reflection of this fragile, carbon-rich environment, which threatens to release extraordinary amounts of carbon into the atmosphere should temperatures rise further. It was accompanied by the “Venice Agreement”, a poetic declaration signed by artists and scientists in support of conserving wetlands. It was also a reminder that art can make complicated climate issues resonate with audiences and highlight connections between disparate parts of the world. Or as Camila Marambio, the curator of the Chilean exhibit says, it can elevate “worlds that are invisible or sidelined or marginalised, as peatlands are.” Other artists convey a feeling of crisis. In England, where 90% of freshwater wetlands have been degraded in the last 500 years owing to deforestation and human activity, Sir Don McCullin, a renowned war photographer, has turned his attention to destruction of a different sort. He has been photographing the Somerset Levels, a stretch of salt marsh and wetlands in the south, for more than 30 years. Drained of colour, his photos capture a stark landscape: meadows are veined with crooked waterways or mired in dark water; sodden land stretches out beneath a restless, metallic sky. “A lot of people have accused me of making my landscapes like battlefields or war scenes,” he says. “I was never trying to make my landscape pictures turn you away from the land. I was just trying to shout louder and say: ‘this is the most important thing we have’,” Sir Don explains. This urgency runs throughout depictions of wetlands and may explain why they are increasingly the backdrop to stories. Sarah Perry’s novel, “The Essex Serpent” (recently adapted into a television series), unfolds amid the fens of East Anglia, while the wetlands of Norfolk in Britain take on a life of their own in “Song of the Reed”, a play on bbc Radio 4. Artists can render these impenetrable places picturesque without sullying them, unlike so many dredgers and developers in the past. In time swamps may come to be seen as places of pleasure rather than peril. ■