We face stormy seas in the coming weeks and months. Supply-side shocks, from the Russian invasion of Ukraine to the labour shortages induced by the covid-19 pandemic, have rocked the global economy. At home, soaring inflation has already made it too difficult for many families to make ends meet, after years of stagnant productivity. And standards of living look set to plummet. I understand the scale of the challenges facing the British economy. Serious challenges require serious leadership. I am standing to be leader of the Conservative Party to chart a return to our economic first principles: lower taxes, pro-growth regulation, local decision-making, fiscal responsibility and investments based on unsentimental assessments of where our strengths and weaknesses lie. These first principles—not more boosterism—are the best path out of our current economic malaise, and towards a higher-productivity, higher-growth future. In the short term, we must make it easier for people in Britain to live, to work, to feed their families and to heat their homes. A social-safety net is not just about providing government hand-outs. It’s about building a thriving economy in all parts of the country which gives people the confidence to take entrepreneurial risks. The spiralling cost of living demands bold and immediate action on many fronts. We must help people to keep more of what they earn, cut tariffs on food and other essential items, and prevent long-term economic scarring by supporting people and businesses through the current crisis. I will reverse the recent rise in national insurance (ni), a payroll tax, which penalises working people. I am the only leadership candidate who did not vote for the ni rate rise earlier this year. It was the wrong policy then, and it remains the wrong policy today. Looking further forward, it is the job of government to provide the conditions—and especially the trust—which underpin economic growth. Timidity in our economic policymaking and chaos in our party politics have dented confidence in the British economy. Only candour and an unflinching commitment to growth will chart a course back to shared prosperity. That is why I have a ten-year plan for Britain’s growth, to bolster investment and opportunity across the United Kingdom. This begins with an honest assessment of our strengths and weaknesses to identify our strongest opportunities for growth, and how we can deliver them. We can’t unlock growth without tackling Britain’s productivity—stalled since the crash in 2008. We must use every means at our disposal to find ways to incentivise investment in British workers and in research and development. Tax cuts are an important first step in revitalising our economic growth, but I will go further and reform the tax code so that it drives further investment. We should allow firms to fully expense their investments in plants and machinery against their tax bills. Under my leadership the country will have the most investment-friendly tax system in the oecd within five years. We can also take advantage of an as yet untouched Brexit dividend. The European Union forced our insurers to sit on £100bn in funds they could not invest. By changing Solvency II rules, we can unleash those dead funds and breathe new life into our communities by investing in British businesses and innovation. Private investment and government funding will achieve little if our decisions are all made in Westminster. Devolution is a cornerstone of my levelling-up policy. iqs are no higher in Islington than Inverness, but the causes of sagging productivity may differ. We need more local input to maximise the opportunities for growth. That’s also why I support a ‘street votes’ policy, which gives local communities more control to get housing in the right places. Building more houses isn’t just about fairness between regions and generations, but about productivity. Time spent on commutes has increased over the past two decades, taking people away from both their families and their work. And we need to invest in people. I have proposed a skills levy and new Institutes of Technology in every region of the country. Both will boost the skills of our workers—and Britain’s productivity. Levelling up isn’t about us v them, a North v South, or an East v West. It’s about harnessing the energy of the entire country to build a better future for everyone. Finally, economic policy must reflect the world we live in. Vladimir Putin’s war has forced 12m Ukranians to flee their homes, China continues to threaten Taiwan and the Taliban are back in control of Afghanistan. Insecurity threatens our future prosperity, so any plan for growth must shore up our economic security in the face of these threats. Clean energy will lower domestic costs and boost our manufacturing sector, but also protect us from the whims of autocratic regimes. Diversifying our supply chains will help to insulate us from external shocks, but also shore up our own industrial production. And taking full advantage of our regulatory sovereignty outside of the European Union—to back genetically-modified crops, reducing waste and reliance on harmful pesticides—will bolster our domestic food supplies. Difficult choices lie ahead of us. I will not shrink from that truth, because people deserve honesty from their government. But nor will I shrink from the challenge of securing a more vibrant future for the United Kingdom, using every cog in the machine of government to unleash the full potential of our economy. Conservatism is about leaving behind a better world than the one we found. ■_______________ Tom Tugendhat is the MP for Tonbridge, Edenbridge and Malling, and chairman of the foreign-affairs committee in the House of Commons. The Economist has invited all candidates vying to lead the Conservative party to submit a commentary on their plans for Britain’s long-term economic growth.