THE NEXT presidential election in America will feature neither Joe Biden nor Donald Trump. Rather, it will involve the candidates vying to be president of the Navajo Nation: 15 of them are competing in the primary contest on August 2nd. The top two will then go head to head in the general election in November. The candidates have a lot of ground to cover. The Navajo Nation, straddling Arizona, Utah and New Mexico, is the largest Native American reservation in the country, bigger in area than ten of the 50 states. And thanks to brisk enrolment of citizens living outside the reservation (boosted by the lure of covid relief funds), it vies with the Cherokee to be the most populous tribal nation, with around 400,000 people. Legally, it is both a “domestic dependent nation” and a sovereign state predating the founding of the United States. In practice, the Navajo government’s authority is somewhere between that of an American state and an independent country, not unlike Scotland’s relationship with the United Kingdom—which is to say, it’s complicated, and distinctive. The distinctiveness is evident in the presidential campaign. Candidates are not linked with a political party. Abortion rights, gun control and other culture-war issues that feature prominently in debates in the rest of the country are largely absent from Navajo election rhetoric. Investment in infrastructure, jobs and, especially, water sovereignty dominate discussions. Many voters mention their anger at how many Navajo households still must transport water to their homes by truck, despite previous administrations’ promises to solve the issue. And the electorate is a varied one. At an event in Teec Nos Pos, a community of 500 inhabitants near Four Corners Monument, attendees skew towards retirement age and many candidates answer questions in the Navajo language. At a forum in metropolitan Phoenix, home to the largest off-reservation population of Navajo voters, most attendees are of working age and every candidate answers primarily in English. The 15 candidates vary from nervous newcomers to polished professionals. Frankie Davis, a business owner who appears on YouTube videos as “Navajo Grandma”, pledges, Trump-like, to build a wall around the reservation. She is not expected to advance past the primary. The three front-runners are widely reckoned to be the current president, Jonathan Nez; a construction executive, Buu Nygren; and a former Navajo Nation attorney-general, Ethel Branch. After four years in office, Mr Nez is skilled at interacting with a crowd. Of the six candidates at the debate in Phoenix, he receives the most applause. But incumbency is not an obvious advantage: he would be only the second Navajo president to be re-elected. Mr Nygren, wearing a black hat with a high crown and wide brim, dresses traditionally and, at the Teec Nos Pos forum, answers questions exclusively in Navajo. Such gestures are popular with voters worried about preserving Navajo culture. He also stresses his pragmatism. “My background is all construction,” Mr Nygren says. “Managing projects. When you come [to the presidency], it’s almost the same thing.” Ms Branch boasts three Harvard degrees. In response to the covid-19 pandemic she set up a charity that delivered essential supplies to many thousands of Navajo citizens—work that has drawn many supporters to her candidacy. No woman has yet been president of Navajo Nation, but it may be an idea whose time has come. “There’s always been this belief that women could not serve in leadership positions, partly because of culture,” says Duane Beyal, editor of the Navajo Times, the reservation’s main newspaper. But, he says, “people keep redefining” what Navajo culture means, and lately people have been stressing “that women are the leaders”. The primary election, in which nearly half the candidates are women, is a chance to see how much attitudes have changed.■