For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter Hong kongers have long been wary of China’s plans for the former British colony. Since the 1980s, the Chinese Communist Party has been able to send around 150 people to Hong Kong every day through a one-way permit scheme. More than 1m people from the mainland have migrated to Hong Kong in this way—about a seventh of the city’s current population (see chart). Hundreds of thousands more have come through other visa schemes. Some locals dub this “Hong Kong’s blood transfusion”. They argue the authorities are keen to replace troublesome Hong Kongers fighting for democracy with mainlanders more loyal to the party. In June 2019 hundreds of thousands marched through the city to protest against a proposed law that would have allowed criminal suspects in Hong Kong to be extradited to mainland China for trial. That month marked the start of the largest pro-democracy protests the city had ever seen. Around that time, party officials in the city were ordered to study an article that outlined a policy known as “keep Hong Kong but not its people”, according to Ching Cheong, a journalist who has studied the Communist Party in Hong Kong for five decades. But the groundwork had been laid decades earlier. In preparation for Britain’s handover of Hong Kong in 1997, party officials used the permit scheme, originally designed to reunite families, to relocate party members to the territory’s police, customs and immigration departments. By one estimate this came to 83,000 people. Mainland officials, not the Hong Kong government, decide who gets a permit. This, say analysts of the Communist Party in Hong Kong, is one way that the Chinese government successfully groomed a sympathetic and long-lasting political elite.  China has attempted to rebuild Hong Kong in its image in a range of ways. In addition to the migration drives, officials on the mainland have overhauled Hong Kong’s education system, judiciary and media, leaving little room for public dissent. Meanwhile, the oppressive policies are driving hundreds of thousands of Hong Kongers with anti-China views out of the city. But after accounting for inward migration, the net outflow of people last year was only 9,400. The Asian financial hub remains the freest city on Chinese soil. For ambitious mainland Chinese who speak fluent Mandarin, Cantonese and English, their futures in Hong Kong have never been brighter. Polling shows that the share of people identifying as “Chinese” is increasing rapidly, reaching its highest since December 2018. The proportion calling themselves “Hong Kongers” fell to 39% in June—the lowest level since the end of 2017. Young people remain resistant: just 2% of people aged 18-29 in the city identify as “Chinese” when asked. But as the crackdown intensifies, they will have little choice other than to see Hong Kong become more Chinese. ■