Zoom does little to diminish Victoria Folashade “Shade” Thomas-Fahm’s glamorous persona. The 88-year-old fashion designer looks regal in a velvet gele (an intricately tied headwrap) and matching dress in the emerald of her country’s tropical forests. In Yoruba, one of Nigeria’s main languages, Folashade loosely translates as “to be honoured with a crown”. The name suits Mrs Thomas-Fahm well: she is hailed as Nigeria’s first modern fashion designer and credited with formalising the country’s garment industry in the early 1960s. In short, Mrs Thomas-Fahm is considered fashion royalty. Now her towering influence is being celebrated in “Africa Fashion”, a landmark exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) in London that explores style on the continent. Like many Nigerians of her generation, Mrs Thomas-Fahm’s early years and cultural taste were shaped by time spent in Britain, the colonial “mother country”. She left Lagos for London in 1953 at the age of 19, intending to become a nurse. Instead, her interest in clothes was piqued on Edgware Road and she enrolled at St Martin’s School of Art (now Central Saint Martins) to pursue a career in fashion. Thus began a life defined by a series of firsts. She became the first Nigerian woman to achieve a professional qualification in fashion design when she graduated in 1959. Back home in Lagos she founded a ready-to-wear fashion line using Nigerian textiles, an innovative and unprecedented move. Spotting the economic potential of Nigeria’s fashion industry, she opened one of the first garment factories in Lagos, run according to the efficient production techniques she had observed in London. “We wanted to make a mark, to apply what we had learned abroad,” Mrs Thomas-Fahm explains. There more than 40 factory workers stitched, dyed and embroidered garments which were then sold in Maison Shade—later Shade’s Boutique—the first high-end store in Nigeria to sell locally made, off-the-rack fashion. Before that shoppers bought Western imports from department stores, or made-to-measure clothing. (To this day many Nigerians still turn to a tailor for a new outfit, unlike in the West where bespoke garments are often prohibitively costly.) “We [Nigerians] are blessed with textiles and a great sense of style”, says Lisa Folawiyo, a Nigerian designer whose lustrous outfits also feature at the V&A. “Fashion was seen as a cultural thing. She [Mrs Thomas-Fahm] helped it to become an industry.” Mrs Thomas-Fahm had returned from London to Lagos in 1960, the year that Nigeria and 16 other African countries declared independence. The liberationist zeal that was sweeping the continent infused her designs too: she was one of several African designers to embrace heritage cloth as a way of asserting national identity. One of Mrs Thomas-Fahm’s pieces on display at the V&A—a floor-length robe resplendent in gold—is crafted from okene, a textile woven by the Ebira people in central Nigeria. The designer opted for fabrics that Nigeria’s ethnic groups wove by hand, such as aso-oke, adire and akwete. Her clothing reflected the intricacy and diversity of Nigerian craftsmanship (pictured, below). It also buoyed the local economy. “We had so many people without jobs, and the only thing I could do was to promote Nigerian fabric,” she says. These fresh takes on traditional textiles and silhouettes resonated in the newly independent country; her fans included Wole Soyinka, Africa’s first Nobel laureate in literature, Hannah Awolowo, the first lady of Nigeria’s old Western Region, and Princess Elizabeth of Toro, a trailblazing model, government minister and Uganda’s first female lawyer. The designer tweaked women’s styles to chime with their growing autonomy. She added zips to the iro, traditional wrapper skirts, and pioneered the pre-tied gele. Working women “could be stylish but practical at the same time,” says Christine Checinska, the curator of the exhibition. Mrs Thomas-Fahm puts it succinctly: “If you want to do business, you cannot be tying and untying all day.” In the early 2000s Mrs Thomas-Fahm bowed to competition from the global fashion industry and closed her final boutique in Lagos. By then, the designer says, upper-class Nigerians had pivoted towards Western couture, depriving local brands of clientele. But as “Africa Fashion”, the exhibition in London, highlights, her ideas endure in the work of contemporary designers from the region. “The fact that [Mrs Thomas-Fahm] successfully worked with local textiles has shown us that it is possible…it is fashion, and it is wearable,” says Ms Folawiyo, who relies on Nigerian artisans to embellish her garments with crystals and sequins (pictured, below). An exhibition in Lagos dedicated to Mrs Thomas-Fahm’s legacy is in the works. For the occasion Ms Folawiyo is reimagining one of the octogenarian’s signature looks: a skirt suit festooned with glistening beads. More than half a century after she first made a splash, Mrs Thomas-Fahm’s brilliance still shines. ■ “Africa Fashion” continues at the V&A Museum, London, until April 16th 2023