The immediate reaction across Europe to Boris Johnson’s decision to resign was relief. The departing prime minister was a principal architect of Brexit; his chaotic government constantly needled Brussels. Michel Barnier, the eu’s former Brexit negotiator, greeted the news by saying it opened “a new page in relations” between Britain and the bloc. That is too optimistic. Indeed, as Fabian Zuleeg of the European Policy Centre, a think-tank, puts it, relations may deteriorate further rather than improve. The biggest bone of contention is the bill to allow the government unilaterally to rewrite the Northern Ireland protocol, which by keeping the province (but not Great Britain) in the single market for goods necessitates a customs border in the Irish Sea. Maros Sefcovic of the European Commission says that the bill “illegally rips up the protocol and is highly damaging to mutual trust”. He notes that this part of the Brexit withdrawal treaty was negotiated at Britain’s express wish three years ago. Cheekily aping Mr Johnson’s own election-winning slogan, he has said it is time we “got Brexit done”. Introducing the bill to Parliament last month, Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, said her preference was to negotiate changes to the protocol; the bill was insurance in case this fails. But Mr Sefcovic detects no appetite among eu leaders to reopen a treaty sealed after years of talks. Diplomats say serious political negotiation is impossible when they see a gun on the table. The eu feels that, were it to concede to unilateral threats, that would weaken it in all international negotiations. The eu has resumed legal action against Britain for failure to apply the protocol in full. Diplomats in Brussels are also watching the bill’s passage carefully. It has passed its second reading in the House of Commons and is due to go to committee stage next week, where it may be amended. Some question whether the interim government that Mr Johnson still leads has the constitutional authority to push ahead with legislation this controversial; there are also hopes it might be blocked in the House of Lords. Yet even if there are impediments to the bill’s progress, it is fanciful to expect any new Tory prime minister simply to junk it. Candidates to take over from Mr Johnson must seek support from hardline mps in the European Research Group, a Eurosceptic group of Tory mps. They know that Conservative Party members, who will make the final choice of leader, are more pro-Brexit than most backbenchers. Ms Truss herself is a contender; she is most unlikely to soften her attitude to the eu when canvassing support. If the bill is enacted, even under a new and more emollient British prime minister, Brussels is bound to respond strongly. Mr Sefcovic has said that nothing is ruled out. The terms of Britain’s trade agreement allow retaliation for a failure to stick to the withdrawal treaty. That could include targeted tariffs and might even extend to scrapping the entire post-Brexit trade deal. The bill has soured broader relations. Mr Sefcovic says it has made it impossible to strike deals on British participation in the Horizon scientific-research programme or over financial services. Co-operation over Russia’s war in Ukraine is a partial exception to this gloomy picture. But British hopes that their new fans in eastern Europe might stop trade retaliation are overblown: east European leaders are clear that sticking to treaty commitments and protecting the single market are higher priorities. The eu clearly regrets Brexit, but it also sees some advantages in the absence of a curmudgeonly member. The view that Brexit is causing economic damage is widespread, and may be responsible for a rise in popular support for the club outside Britain. There is no prospect of a reversal even if the opposition Labour Party wins the next election. In a speech on July 4th Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, promised that his party will seek neither to overturn Brexit nor to rejoin the single market or customs union. Sir Keir has suggested that a more harmonious relationship with the eu could make Brexit work better, however, and diplomats in Brussels agree. Mr Sefcovic thinks more changes could be negotiated without changing the treaty text—he claims to have trimmed the form needed for a mixed-goods lorry to enter Northern Ireland from a theoretical 700 pages to just three—but only if mutual trust is restored. Mr Johnson’s departure may have been necessary for that happen, but it is not sufficient. ■