You probably know the lyrics without knowing when or how you learned them. “American Pie”, a folk anthem by Don McLean released in 1971, has ingratiated itself into the brains of millions of Americans, and, according to a new documentary that marks the tune’s 50th anniversary, many more people around the world. When those memorable first lines (“A long, long time ago/I can still remember/How that music used to make me smile”) start to play, listeners know they are in for nearly nine minutes of cryptic references to rock‘n’roll history, the Vietnam war and America itself. “The Day the Music Died”, which has its premiere on Paramount+ on July 19th, analyses those mysterious lyrics—only to reveal that the song is less complicated than long thought. “The day the music died”—a phrase which ends each verse—is February 3rd 1959. That was when Buddy Holly and two fellow musicians were killed in a plane crash after a gig in Clear Lake, Iowa. Holly, who was just 22 when he died, was a pioneer of rock‘n’roll in the 1950s. Mr McLean, now 76, found out his childhood idol had perished while delivering newspapers in his home town of New Rochelle, New York. Much of the film is spent explaining Mr McLean’s affinity for Holly, and why his death inspired a song released some 12 years after the crash. Other lines have provoked more speculation. “While the king was looking down/the jester stole his thorny crown” is a particular favourite among fans. “American Pie” enthusiasts have long wondered whether the lyric refers to Bob Dylan (the jester) surpassing Elvis (the King) in popularity during the 1960s. Mr McLean pours cold water on the theory, insisting that if he were referring to the two men, he would have just said so: he says the jester and king are characters he made up. Similar debunkings occur throughout the film. “The three men I admire most/The Father, Son and the Holy Ghost” turns out to be the actual Holy Trinity, not some trio of rock gods, or, as some had surmised, John F. Kennedy, Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King. The documentary is, at times, too self-congratulatory to be taken seriously. Perhaps that is inevitable when a 90-minute film is devoted to one song. Garth Brooks, a country singer who has regularly covered “American Pie”, more than once refers to it as the greatest song in music history. Yet its staying power 50 years after its release does make it a cultural phenomenon. Artists as diverse as Madonna and “Weird Al” Yankovic have covered it. One country singer suggests the track is so ubiquitous that it “feels like it always existed”. The song’s rollicking piano and “hot chorus” (in Mr McLean’s words) mask its melancholy. Ed Freeman, the producer, suggests that “American Pie” was a kind of eulogy for the peaceful future the hippies of the 1960s had envisioned. Mr McLean says that the ending (“I met a girl who sang the blues/And I asked her for some happy news/But she just smiled and turned away”) implies that America was headed in the wrong direction. Some listeners today may recognise that sentiment. No such gloom is perceptible when “American Pie” is performed, however. When your reviewer went to see Mr McLean’s recent tour in Denver, hundreds of grey-haired concert-goers danced in the aisles. The vibe was more sing-a-long than concert. During a quiet moment, one woman screamed: “You are the soundtrack to my life!” Even if the documentary may disappoint fans hoping for lyrical revelations, the song itself will continue to delight. ■ “The Day the Music Died: American Pie” is streaming worldwide on Paramount+ from July 19th