“It is time,” Justice Samuel Alito wrote in his majority opinion overruling Roe v Wade, “to return the issue of abortion to the people’s elected representatives.” But in the weeks since Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organisation—the case that scrapped a five-decade-old constitutional right to abortion—litigators, not legislators, have been the busiest. The result is a chaotic and quickly shifting landscape of abortion access across the states. On July 20th the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals resuscitated Georgia’s law banning abortion at about six weeks of pregnancy and defining fetuses as “natural persons”. The law had been blocked in 2020 by a federal district court. After Dobbs, the challengers acknowledged that the six-week prohibition had become constitutional but continued to argue that the law’s personhood provision was unconstitutionally vague. The appellate court disagreed. The expanded definition of personhood may introduce puzzles—whether, for example, a pregnant woman may be charged with child abuse for drinking alcohol—but those uncertainties are not damning, the panel said. They can be litigated, if necessary, one by one. In contrast, two recent rulings have heartened supporters of abortion rights. Abortions resumed at the sole remaining clinic in West Virginia after a judge, on July 18th, granted a preliminary injunction against the state’s 150-year-old ban. And in Kentucky a judge decided a freeze on its law banning abortion should remain in effect as it violates “the rights to privacy and self-determination” of Kentucky women. The judge also cited another reason to keep the law on ice: it is based on the state legislature adopting particular “religious tenets”—an exercise the Kentucky constitution expressly prohibits. More lawsuits are flying to clarify the status of abortion access in some 15 states including Arizona, Michigan and Wisconsin. Eleven state constitutions contain an explicit right to privacy—something the federal constitution, the Dobbs majority pointed out, lacks. Article I, section 23 of Florida’s constitution, for example, guarantees that “[e]very natural person has the right to be let alone and free from governmental intrusion into the person’s private life”. A state judge determined in June that this privacy right precluded Florida’s recently enacted 15-week abortion ban. That decision is on hold, however, and final word will probably come from Florida’s state supreme court—which Mary Ziegler, a historian of abortion, observes, has recently become more conservative. A similar challenge is in the works in South Carolina, where the state constitution bars “unreasonable invasions of privacy”. Other state constitutional provisions underpin challenges to abortion restrictions in North Dakota (where Article I protects “life and liberty” as well as “safety and happiness”) and Oklahoma (where Article II protects “inherent rights” including those to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness”). Standing judgments from the state supreme courts of Kansas and Montana already find abortion rights in their state constitutions, though on August 2nd Kansans will vote on a proposed constitutional revision that would nullify the state’s high-court ruling from 2019 and permit its Republican-dominated legislature to limit or ban abortion. A lawsuit filed by Texas against the Biden administration adds another dimension to post-Roe tussles. On July 11th the Department of Health and Human Services instructed hospitals nationwide to perform abortions for women with emergency medical conditions that necessitate such care. If termination is the “stabilising treatment” needed for women with ectopic pregnancies or similar plights, the guidance states, the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labour Act (emtala) requires doctors to provide abortions “irrespective of any state laws” to the contrary. In his complaint filed on July 14th Ken Paxton, Texas’s attorney-general, says this guidance “attempt[s] to use federal law to transform every emergency room in the country into a walk-in abortion clinic”. Mr Biden is “flagrantly disregarding the legislative and democratic process…by having his appointed bureaucrats mandate that hospitals and emergency medicine physicians must perform abortions”. This is tantamount, Mr Paxton says, to requiring medical professionals “to commit crimes and risk their licensure under Texas law”. A sign of the next phase in America’s abortion wars may be found in Mr Paxton’s view that emtala “does not guarantee access to abortion” but “contemplates that an emergency medical condition is one that threatens the life of the unborn child”. Ms Ziegler expects red states to move “more aggressively to push for fetal personhood”, which could spur a nationwide ban on abortion. How long will the legal wrangling continue? Ms Ziegler says the rancour could go on for “another 50 years”. ■ For exclusive insight and reading recommendations from our correspondents in America, sign up to Checks and Balance, our weekly newsletter.