It has been 75 years since American newspapers started using the term “flying saucers” to describe the unidentified flying objects which their readers kept spotting. The anniversary hasn’t been marked by international celebrations, let alone intergalactic ones, but, by a happy coincidence, the new horror comedy-drama from Jordan Peele, the writer-director of “Get Out” and “Us”, is a flying-saucer movie. Mr Peele has said that he wanted to make “the Great American ufo movie...not only a flying-saucer horror film, but really the quintessential one”. At times, he comes close. As in his previous films, he has taken a classic science-fiction concept—it was body-swapping in “Get Out” and doppelgangers in “Us”—and approached it from a new angle, celebrating the cinematic history of the flying saucer while introducing a brilliantly novel twist on who the aliens are and what they want. “Nope” features Daniel Kaluuya (who also starred in “Get Out”) and Keke Palmer as OJ and Emerald, a brother and sister who run a ranch in California, and provide horses for Hollywood films and TV series. OJ is gruff and shy, more at home with horses than people; Emerald is an extrovert who hopes to fast-talk her way into stardom. Neither of them is as suited to Hollywood horse-wrangling as their much-admired father (Keith David), but he was killed by a coin which fell on him from the sky: the creepy death scene is a shining example of Mr Peele’s use of restraint, dread and mind-bending weirdness. The authorities contend that the coin, along with all sorts of other metal bits and pieces, must have dropped from a plane, but OJ isn’t convinced. He then spots a flying saucer flitting between the clouds over a nearby mountain, like the shark being glimpsed in “Jaws”. (Another Steven Spielberg film, “Close Encounters of The Third Kind”, is clearly an influence.) This, says Emerald, is their big chance to save the family business—and to become rich and famous. With the help of a local electronics salesman (Brandon Perea) and a grizzled veteran cinematographer (Michael Wincott), they intend to take the first irrefutable photograph of an alien spaceship. It’s an exciting scenario, and Ms Palmer’s fizzingly charismatic performance should push her onto the A-list. But “Nope” isn’t quite the great American ufo movie. Mr Peele’s second film, “Us”, had a bigger budget and scope than his first, “Get Out”, but it lacked the tight focus which made the mystery and satire of “Get Out” so intense. Unfortunately “Nope” continues this diffuse trend. Rather than concentrate on the ranchers and their helpers, Mr Peele’s ambitious sprawl encompasses the neighbouring property, a Wild West theme park run by a former Hollywood child star known as Jupe (Steven Yeun). Yet the film does not remain focused on Jupe and his theme park, either: it flashes back to the shooting of his sitcom in the 1990s, when a chimpanzee went berserk and attacked the actors. This nightmarish sequence is one of Mr Peele’s best: original, shocking, horribly tense. It deserves to be the centrepiece of a movie of its own. But like so many of the other elements in “Nope”, it is wasted in a film about alien abduction: it is introduced only to be forgotten soon afterwards. If anyone could make the quintessential flying-saucer horror movie, it would be someone as mischievously thoughtful and profoundly nerdy as Mr Peele. But that can’t happen while he is distracted by such preoccupations as the Wild West, animal training, child stars, social media, and the erasure of black people from Hollywood history. By drifting between so many topics in two hours, he has ended up with a slow and rambling film, unclear in its action, shaky in its logic and muddled in its themes. Perhaps that’s what happens when you win an Oscar for your first screenplay: nobody wants to tell you that your third needs pruning. “Nope” is neither as funny nor as frightening as Mr Peele’s other films, and it doesn’t build up the momentum which might have whisked the viewer past some of its sillier plot developments. (OJ’s intuitive understanding of extra-terrestrial thought processes is convenient, to say the least.) But it is an unqualified success in one respect, in that it makes the archetypal flying saucer seem eerie and threatening once again. After 75 years, that’s quite an achievement. “Nope” is screening in cinemas in America now and in Britain from August 12th