For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter “Constitutions should consist only of general provisions,” argued Alexander Hamilton, one of America’s Founding Fathers, in a speech to the Senate in 1788. “The reason is that they must necessarily be permanent, and that they cannot calculate for the possible change of things.” America’s constitution has long had its detractors and admirers. But most agree that, if nothing else, it is short and general. Should Chileans vote to adopt their new constitution, proposed this week, it would be anything but. (See chart). Over the years, constitutions have grown ever more long-winded. The Comparative Constitutions Project, a research outfit, has collected data on those adopted by independent states since 1789 (the chart shows those currently in force). Chile’s proposed basic law would put it in the ten wordiest constitutions (depending on how you count). It is expected to bulge with as many as 54,000 words, almost as many as that of nearby Ecuador. In general, older constitutions are shorter (perhaps because paper used to be more costly). But by far the longest still in operation is India’s, which was ratified in 1949 and has been in force since 1950. By some counts, it was over 140,000 words long when it was first adopted (though some put the figure at just under 80,000 if only counting certain sections). Presiding over the process was Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar, who is often called the father of India’s constitution. The final document was hand-written in both English and Hindi. If pictures are worth a thousand words, it would be longer still: pages were illustrated, featuring work by Beohar Rammanohar Sinha and Nandalal Bose, among others. The text has since been amended more than 100 times. Indonesia’s constitution, in contrast, is an admirable study in brevity, at just 1,802 words. It has been amended a mere four times since it was reinstated in 1959, having been ratified in 1945 (its other constitutions were in place between 1949 to 1959). It gets straight to the point, starting: “Whereas Independence is truly the right of all nations and therefore colonisation in the world shall be abolished, as it is not in accordance with humanity and justice.” Chile’s proposed new constitution is due to be put to a popular vote on September 4th. Chileans had better get reading. To get through it, they would need to average roughly 900 words of constitutional law per day. ■