This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. Singapore tends to attract extreme views. To its fans it is a miraculous island of stability and prosperity in a troubled sea of regional turbulence. To its critics it is, in the famous phrase of William Gibson, an American-Canadian novelist, “Disneyland with the death penalty”: a dystopia run on the principle “be happy, or I’ll kill you”. The argument has an importance beyond the fate of the 6m people who live there. Singapore’s success in achieving the forms of democracy while remaining under one-party rule is an inspiration to leaders elsewhere, notably in China, and hence a challenge to Western notions of the superiority of political liberalism. These books are all fun to read, and provide insights into Singapore’s history and the arguments on both sides of the debate. The Singapore Story. By Lee Kuan Yew. Simon & Schuster; 680 pages and From Third World to First. By Lee Kuan Yew. HarperCollins; 752 pages; $38. Harper Business; £12.99 There was, The Economist noted on his death in 2015, no vainglory in the title of Lee Kuan Yew’s memoirs, “The Singapore Story”, published in 1998. Few leaders have so embodied and dominated their countries: Fidel Castro, perhaps, and Kim Il Sung, in their day. But both of those signally failed to match Mr Lee’s achievement in propelling Singapore “From Third World to First” (as the second volume, published in 2000, is called). Moreover, he managed it against far worse odds: no space, beyond a crowded little island; no natural resources; and, as an island of polyglot immigrants, not much shared history. His memoirs are, of course, history as written by one of its winners. But with his other talents, Lee was also a good writer and tells Singapore’s story in an engaging way. His intelligence, drive and ambition shine through the account of his early life and his evolution in later years into a kind of geopolitical guru at whose feet other statesmen loved to sit. So do his ruthlessness and capacity to hold a grudge. That, however, is not why he remembers, decades later, the name of the student who beat him into second place in two national exams. (Reader, he married her.) The Singapore Grip. By J.G. Farrell. NYRB Classics; 583 pages; $19.95. Weidenfeld & Nicholson; £10.99 Lee Kuan Yew was just 18 when Singapore fell to the Japanese in 1942, exposing as shambolic Britain’s preparations to defend its colony, which at the time also comprised the Malay peninsula, Penang and Sabah and Sarawak on Borneo. This novel, the third in Farrell’s “empire” trilogy (the others being “Troubles” on Ireland and “The Siege of Krishnapur” on the Indian mutiny), is a devastating and at times hilarious commentary on the smug pretensions, thoughtless racism and irredeemable incompetence of colonial rule. Published in 1978, it is also a moving account of cultural misunderstandings and the horrors of war. The story centres on a fictional trading house, supposedly a pillar of the colonial economy, and the planned match between children of two of its founders. One, Matthew Webb, is the closest the book comes to having a hero, but he is a fairly hopeless one. A recent Oxford graduate he is full of idealism (about, of all things, the League of Nations) and naively ignorant of the world—giving the book its title and a running joke as he tries to find out what “the Singapore grip” actually is. More Summer reads• How to watch the Tour de France from afar• A Nicaraguan writer reflects on exile from a dictatorship• The global rise of Super Mario• Our Bartleby columnist picks beach reads for business folk• The multitudes of memories contained in a Maid-Rite sandwich The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye. By Sonny Liew. Pantheon; 320 pages; $30 As a counterpoint to Lee Kuan Yew’s official Singapore story, this brilliantly inventive graphic novel offers an alternative take on its emergence as an independent nation. Sonny Liew explores Singapore’s history through the career of Charlie, a fictional cartoonist. The book, from 2015, is a series of interviews with Charlie, beginning in 2010, when he is 72 years old. Charlie’s work is political almost from the start. Lee Kuan Yew makes an early appearance in his work in “Invasion”, depicting humanity under the rule of an alien race, the Hegemons. Mr Lee is a lawyer who speaks fluent Hegemonese. Charlie also uses allegory to tell the story of Singapore’s failed merger with the Federation of Malaya in the early 1960s, with Mr Lee as Sang Kancil, a mouse-deer figure from Malaysian folk tales who lives by his wits. Charlie’s versions of Mr Lee grow steadily more Machiavellian. The book does not shy away from controversial periods in the nation’s history. It remains available in Singapore. But just before its official launch, the National Arts Council revoked a grant awarded to it because, as an nac director explained, the book “potentially undermines the authority or legitimacy of the Singapore government”. The Ocean in a Drop. Singapore: the next 50 years. By Ho Kwon Ping. World Scientific Publishing; 165 pages; S$27 Ho Kwon Ping is an interesting figure. A former journalist, he was detained in Singapore in 1977 under the Internal Security Act for writing allegedly leftist articles for the Far Eastern Economic Review, a now defunct (conservative) regional news magazine with its headquarters in Hong Kong. He went on, with his wife, to found Banyan Tree Holdings which operates over 50 luxury resorts across Asia and the Middle East, and to become founding chairman of Singapore Management University. Indeed, so much part of the establishment has he become that he is spoken of as a future president, and in 2015 he was asked to give a series of five lectures to mark Singapore’s 50 years as an independent country. This book is a compilation of those lectures, which were thoughtful and provocative. They offer a fair-minded assessment of Singapore’s politics and governance and its economic and business prospects, and included what were, for Singapore, some radical and even heretical suggestions and warnings about looming problems, notably on rising inequality, and on how it would cope with the retirement needs of a rapidly ageing society. Air-conditioned Nation Revisited. By Cherian George. Ethos books; 320 pages; S$25 Not every government critic in Singapore ends up in the establishment. Having failed to secure a tenured position in Singapore, Cherian George now finds it more congenial to pursue an academic career in Hong Kong, where he is a professor at Baptist University, writing on media and politics. A former journalist at the Straits Times, in 2000 he published “Singapore: The Air-conditioned Nation”, a collection of essays that remains the best introduction to Singapore’s idiosyncratic political system, and was substantially updated 20 years later. The title stems from the first essay, on one of Lee Kuan Yew’s quirkier obsessions. When a number of 20th-century luminaries were asked by the Wall Street Journal in 1999 to pick the most influential invention of the millennium, he was alone in shunning the printing press, electricity, the internal combustion engine and the internet. He chose the air-conditioner, explaining that, before air-con, people living in the tropics were at a disadvantage because heat and humidity damaged the quality of their work. Mr George spots in this technology the perfect metaphor for Singapore’s governance: the combination of comfort, on the one hand, and central control on the other. ■ Our former Asia columnist wrote a special report on Singapore in 2015, marking the 50th anniversary of its founding.____________________________ Do you have your own recommendations? Send them to summer@economist.com with the subject line “Singapore” and your name, city and country. We will publish a selection of readers’ suggestions. More from The Economist reads:Our former South-East Asia correspondent picks seven books about MyanmarOur obituaries editor chooses the five best biographies ever writtenWe pick four books on the burning of the American WestOur food columnist selects the seven essential cookbooks