She is no stranger to glitzy, high-profile work. Tosin Oshinowo appeared in “Made by Design”, a documentary on Netflix, to showcase her luxury-home projects (she has been dubbed Nigeria’s “beach house queen”). She has collaborated with Lexus on a collection of headpieces and will curate the Sharjah Architecture Triennial in 2023. But the architect—who has her own practice, cmDesign Atelier, in Lagos—has recently completed a very different kind of project. In Borno state, in rural north-eastern Nigeria, she has designed a village for people whose homes were destroyed by Boko Haram, a terrorist group, in 2014. Borno state has been particularly afflicted by the Boko Haram insurgency. Following the attack, the residents of Ngarannam have been dispersed across several camps for internally displaced people; there are 277 such camps in north-east Nigeria alone. The Nigerian government and United Nations Development Programme (undp) decided to rebuild the village on the same site. That decision was risky, given the ongoing attacks, and Ms Oshinowo had a military escort as she worked on the job. Her design for the village had to include a deep trench around the outskirts and four security towers. All the same, it was important “to relocate people to their ancestral homes”, says Ms Oshinowo, adding that many in the region are farmers or herders. When its denizens return to Ngarannam in August, the village will be made up of 360 homes, accommodating 2,160 people, as well as a marketplace, health clinic, community centre, primary school and police station. Once the community members are settled, they will construct a mosque. (This was not part of Ms Oshinowo’s master plan as the UN does not build religious institutions.) The needs, customs and culture of the community have shaped the design. After accepting the commission in 2020, Ms Oshinowo met Ngarannam residents and asked them about their preferences for the new village. Comfort was crucial. “The community told me the existing resettlement buildings were too hot with not enough shade and no roof ventilation,” says Ms Oshinowo. In her scheme, small openings at the sides of gabled roofs let hot air out. “It’s such a simple little thing, but it makes such a massive difference.” Those who lived in Ngarannam belong to the Kanuri, an ethnic group. “In Kanuri culture, there is an important distinction between public and private spaces in the home,” Ms Oshinowo explains. Reception areas for visitors are separate to the rest of the house, and there is a private, walled, central courtyard for the women of the family. The villagers also offered input into colours. They expressed a preference for homes in the shade “Abuja brown”, Ms Oshinowo says, as it evokes local buildings made from mud. “It made me realise: they’re looking for something familiar…I was very particular that we should mimic that, even in a modern context.” Ms Oshinowo therefore finished the homes in a mix of cement and sand—which will be long-lasting as well as offer the right look. Elsewhere, in the central village marketplace, geometric canopy covers in bright green and yellow take inspiration from a colourful formal cap men wear in Nigeria, the Borno cap, which is traditionally sewn by Kanuri women. Ms Oshinowo (pictured above) describes the experience of working on this project as a “privilege”. The design presented new challenges and concerns, and she says she would embrace the opportunity to do this sort of work again. “Quality, intentional design is too often a luxury of the wealthy and responsive to a lifestyle most people can’t afford,” she says. “It’s great to use your skills as a designer in this kind of capacity.” After years in camps, the Ngarannam villagers will finally have a home to call their own, one that they helped shape. An additional 140 homes will be built after more funding comes in, providing shelter for 840 people (undp did not disclose exact figures, but says its budget for the entire village is less than $10m). The Ngarannam initiative is the first of its kind, and may be a model for future projects elsewhere. Mohamed Yahya of undp says it does not usually collaborate with designers or architects, “but we wanted to use this as a prototype to show the importance of design in enhancing people’s dignity, ownership and cultural sensitivity—especially internally displaced people.” ■