WHEN IT LAUNCHED on Christmas Day in 2021, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) was 11 years late and almost $10bn over budget. Accusations of mismanagement had brought the project, a collaboration between the space agencies of America, Europe and Canada, to the brink of cancellation. But scientists were confident that all would be forgotten once the first images were beamed back to Earth. Thus far, the stunning pictures have justified their confidence. What will the telescope’s long-term impact be? The JWST is proving to be the most sensitive telescope ever for detecting infrared cosmic light (wavelengths just longer than those which humans can see). Radiation of this kind is interesting to astronomers for three reasons. First, it is better at penetrating dust clouds than visible light is, illuminating hitherto hidden regions where stars and solar systems are forming. Second, it is emitted by ancient hot objects such as stars and galaxies whose wavelengths have been stretched into the infrared by the universe’s expansion. Third, it also corresponds to the emissions of cool objects such as planets, including those potentially capable of hosting life. The telescope’s ability to detect infrared is set to spark a revolution in astronomy. The JWST will be able to see the light of the very first stars and galaxies, those formed within a few hundred million years of the Big Bang. It will also be able to spot distant planets, both by detecting their heat directly and by discerning the diminishing brightness of their host stars as the orbiting planets pass in front. Transit analyses of this kind will shed light on the composition of planetary atmospheres, revealing where in the universe water exists and, potentially, how it got there. This in turn will help to demystify the planets closest to Earth. Astronomers know plenty about the solar system, but have insufficient data from other systems to make useful comparisons about what is normal and what is unusual. The JWST will change that. It will also provide new perspectives on nearby planets. Mercury and Venus are too close to the heat of the sun to take images of, but others—along with their potentially habitable moons—will have their atmospheres and geology analysed in great detail. So much for the mission’s stated scientific aims. The data harvest is sure to include other tantalising fruit. Astrophysicists know that all these galaxies, stars and planets—and our own—account for only 5% of the stuff of the universe. The JWST is likely to shed some light, as it were, on the dark components that make up the rest. About 27% is so-called dark matter, which has mass but whose fundamental makeup remains a mystery. The balance of 68% is dark energy, which propels the expansion of the universe but whose mechanism of action is still more mysterious. Add in some perspectives on the universe’s early black holes and unexplained “fast radio bursts”, intense flashes of radiation that last mere thousandths of a second, and the JWST promises to tackle some of the phenomena that cause the most sleepless nights for astronomers. And, as happens with any scientific apparatus that represents such a leap in capability, some of the most exciting results will be complete surprises. In the words of Kristen McQuinn, an astronomer at Rutgers University in New Jersey, “It’s likely we’ll make discoveries about questions we don’t even know to ask yet.” ■ More from The Economist explains: Why have new Omicron strains of covid not been given Greek names?Could artificial intelligence become sentient?Why might someone have blown up the Georgia Guidestones?