For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter A devastating concoction of record-breaking temperatures and severe droughts have helped ignite wildfires across Europe (see chart). Hundreds of hectares of Spain’s Monfragüe National Park, known for its extensive wildlife including rare birds, have been scorched. Some 16,000 people have been evacuated from their homes in the south-west of France. Firefighters have tackled blazes from Portugal to Turkey. Wildfires are an important part of a healthy ecosystem. But the frequency and size of this year’s blazes pose a significant risk to nearby residents and wildlife. By July 16th 1,756 forest fires had been recorded across the European Union since the start of the year. That is 273% higher than the average for this time of year between 2006 and 2021, and 64% above the highest levels previously recorded within the same period. More than 345,000 hectares of land have been burnt across the EU since January, three-times higher than the average for this time of year. Western Europe saw temperatures rise well above average already in May. By July temperatures shot above average throughout much of the eastern and northern parts of the continent. More than 1,000 people have died in Portugal and Spain in recent days from heat-related complications. Britain issued a heat warning as temperatures were expected to climb above 40°C and Balkan countries, such as Croatia and Slovenia, have exceeded record temperatures for June. Meanwhile a worsening drought has affected several parts of Europe, turning large swathes of land into tinder. Fires can then be sparked by natural causes, such as lightning, though more often they have a human cause, such as downed power lines, campfires or arson. In recent years extraordinary fires have been reported in areas not previously considered to be at high risk, such as northern India and Russia. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a UN body, has warned that as the world prepares for a 1.5°C rise above pre-industrial levels over the next two decades, the problem is likely to get worse. The immediate damage to homes, crops and wildlife precedes long-term impacts on public health and ecosystems. For much of the world, living with fire will become the new normal. ■