For a look behind the scenes of our data journalism, sign up to Off the Charts, our weekly newsletter America’s economy tipped into a popular definition of a recession on Thursday—two consecutive quarters of negative growth. In the second quarter of 2022 GDP fell by 0.2% from the previous three months, or 0.9% at an annualised rate (see chart). The White House had been on the defensive in the run-up to the announcement, keen to soothe voters ahead of November’s crucial mid-term elections. The official determination of whether America is in recession is made by the National Bureau for Economic Research, but Americans are already gloomy about the state of the economy. An index published by the Conference Board, an economic-research firm, on July 26th showed that consumer confidence has fallen to its lowest since the lull induced by the covid-19 pandemic. In fact, according to The Economist’s analysis of polls conducted on our behalf by YouGov, a pollster, 31% of adults now say that the economy is the most important issue to them. That compares with 5% each who name government spending or immigration as their top concern, 10% who are most concerned with climate change and 11% who say that health care is their most important problem. That more Americans say the economy, rather than health care, is their most pressing issue is a striking reversal of trends since Donald Trump’s presidency. The last time economic anxiety was polling so high was in May 2014. That was six years after the onset of the global financial crisis. By then, the unemployment rate had fallen back nearly to pre-crisis levels, and both the stockmarket and GDP had recovered from the crash. Concern about the economy continued to fade until 2020, when uncertainty about the pandemic caused a dramatic drop in employment, spending and productivity. But in contrast to the recovery in sentiment after the collapse of 2008, Americans have this time grown more concerned with the economy even as unemployment has reached one of its lowest rates in 70 years. The recent sharp increase in the share who say the economy is their top issue instead reflects concerns about inflation as well as uncertainty about future growth. The second quarter’s contraction in GDP show those fears are well founded. ■