This article is part of our Summer reads series. Visit our collection to discover “The Economist reads” guides, guest essays and more seasonal distractions. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has a limited grasp of Ukrainian culture. In fact, he seems to deny that it exists. Ukraine gained independence only in 1991. But its cultural heritage is far richer than Mr Putin suggests. It is a multilingual country with a vibrant artistic scene and strong civil society. In March we recommended six books for understanding Ukrainian history. Here are four books, and one album, which traverse Ukraine’s geography, literature, music and food, exploring the country on its own terms, not Mr Putin’s. Ukraine: A Nation on the Borderland. By Karl Schlögel. Reaktion Books; 288 pages; $18 and £12.95 Ukraine’s complicated history is expressed through its cities. Even their names reflect the external forces that have shaped the country: the western Ukrainian city of Lviv, for example, has at various points been referred to as Lvov (in Russian), Lwow (in Polish) and Lemberg (in German). Karl Schlögel’s study explores these urban histories by providing “portraits” of eight Ukrainian cities. The descriptions of Kyiv’s ancient metropolis, Lviv’s central European architecture and Odessa’s Jewish history are fascinating. But the evocations of places made newly familiar by Russia’s invasion are especially poignant. The besieged eastern cities of Kharkiv, Dnipro and Donetsk have remarkable histories, but face uncertain futures. Black Square: Adventures in Post-Soviet Ukraine. By Sophie Pinkham. W.W. Norton; 304 pages; $26.95. Cornerstone; £20 Sophie Pinkham provides a very different form of travelogue in her reflective and humorous memoir about modern Ukrainian life. Ms Pinkham spent ten years living in both Ukraine and Russia, having first travelled to the ex-Soviet region as a volunteer for the Red Cross in Siberia. Major historical events marked this decade, including the Maidan revolution in 2014, Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the outbreak of war in the Donbas. The author explores both the roots of Russia’s aggression and its ramifications for Ukraine and the rest of Europe. But the strength of her work lies in the subtle descriptions of ordinary people going about their lives through Ukraine’s often chaotic recent history. Voroshilovgrad. By Serhiy Zhadan. Translated by Reilly Costigan-Humes and Isaac Wheeler. Deep Vellum Publishing; 400 pages; $15.99 and £11.99 Contemporary Ukrainian literature boasts several leading lights, including Oksana Zabuzhko and Andrey Kurkov (who recently wrote three essays for our sister publication, 1843, about the start of the war, his escape from Kyiv and Ukraine’s refugees). Another especially interesting Ukrainian writer is Serhiy Zhadan, a poet, novelist and ska musician. Mr Zhadan’s “Voroshilovgrad”, published in 2010, describes pre-war life in his native Donbas. Combining social and magical realism, the novel follows a political analyst from Kharkiv who travels back to his hometown of Luhansk (previously known as Voroshilovgrad) to help his brother, before falling into a web of mystery and crime. The text’s descriptions of everyday violence are not for the faint of heart. But the novel provides a rare insight into this crucial yet often misunderstood region, currently the focus of Russia’s invasion. Readers who prefer earlier literature may wish to try the works of Taras Shevchenko, Ukraine’s national poet, or Lesia Ukrainka, a notable modernist writer and feminist thinker. More on Ukrainian culture• A Ukrainian ballerina goes to war• The race to digitally preserve Ukraine’s buildings and monuments• Ukrainian musicians have a stark message for the Kremlin Summer Kitchens: Recipes and Reminiscences from Every Corner of Ukraine. By Olia Hercules. Bloomsbury; 352 pages; £26 Ukraine is an important exporter of grain and other staples for the global food market. But its own culinary culture is less commonly celebrated. Olia Hercules highlights the diversity of Ukrainian cuisine using a particular prism: the country’s “summer kitchens”. These small outhouses were common in rural areas, serving as places to prepare summertime meals from homegrown produce and to embark on the near-industrial scale project of pickling vegetables for winter. Ms Hercules intersperses her recollections of summer kitchens with modern versions of traditional recipes. Vegetarian readers may bristle at some of the offerings: pig’s ears with garlic and paprika make an appearance. But dishes such as pickled aubergines with mint and chilli, courgettes with herbaceous dressing and steamed bilberry doughnuts should please most palates. Alambari. Dakhabrakha. (2020) The everyday multilingualism of Ukraine, where many citizens switch casually between Ukrainian and Russian, is reflected in its music scene. A good example is Dakhabrakha (the name means “give and take” in old Ukrainian), a quartet created by an avant-garde theatre director, Vladyslav Troitskyi, in 2004. The group calls its music “ethnic chaos”, a sound that combines Ukrainian and other eastern European folk music with Indian, Arab, west African and Aboriginal rhythms and instrumentation. The quartet’s most recent record, “Alambari”, is infused with the cosmopolitan spirit that has made them an international success. Expect songs in Ukrainian, Bulgarian, English and German, impressive throat-singing and lively percussion that will be sure to get you out of your seat.■ More from The Economist reads:What to read to understand New YorkOur Washington bureau chief recommends five books on cricketOur defence editor picks five books that help make sense of modern warfareOur former South-East Asia correspondent picks seven books about Myanmar