THE HEIGHT of Britain’s summer-travel period is still a couple of weeks away; most state schools break up on July 22nd. But concerns about what awaits holiday-makers as they try to fly abroad have been rising for weeks. Travellers’ tales of long security queues, last-minute cancellations and misplaced luggage have been making headlines since early June. On June 30th the government set out 22 measures designed to minimise disruption this summer and/or shift the blame onto the industry (delete as appropriate). Airport chaos is not confined to Britain. Airports in the Netherlands cancelled triple the proportion of short-haul flights in June that British airports did. But France, Spain, Italy and Portugal all did better than Britain on this score, according to an analysis from OAG, an aviation-data firm. Even small increases in delays and cancellations can cascade through a system as tightly coupled as aviation. Over the bank-holiday weekend starting on June 2nd, between 2% and 4% of flights were cancelled in Britain, said Richard Moriarty of the Civil Aviation Authority at a parliamentary hearing on June 14th. A normal daily cancellation rate is 1%. That may not seem like a big increase but planes and crews can quickly get stranded in the wrong places as a result. The main problem is a mismatch between traveller demand and staffing levels. Covid-related travel restrictions were only fully lifted in March; this year is the first since 2019 when a trip abroad has seemed feasible to many families. As the airports fill, not enough workers are there to funnel passengers through. Britain’s travel restrictions were long-lasting, unpredictable and onerous: the aviation industry laid off swathes of its workforce. The number of full-time “air-travel assistants”, which includes cabin crew and check-in staff, nearly halved from 40,100 in 2019 to 20,500 in 2021, according to the Annual Population Survey. The number of “air-transport operatives”—those who refuel aircraft and lug baggage—fell by more than half during the same period. The ranks of air-traffic controllers slumped by 28%. Some of these people were on furlough schemes and returned to their jobs; many others retired or left the industry. Former baggage-handlers can make comparable money stocking supermarket shelves or sorting parcels in a warehouse, and enjoy more sociable hours into the bargain. Lots of new hires need a security pass for their jobs; obtaining one requires employment-history checks which usually take months. As summer nears, the industry is adopting two main approaches. One is to cut capacity pre-emptively in order to avoid last-minute cancellations. Gatwick airport will limit the number of daily flights it operates. Airlines have been pruning their schedules: on July 5th British Airways said that it would be cancelling another 1,500 flights on top of cuts it had previously announced. To facilitate that, the Department of Transport is temporarily loosening rules that require airlines to run a certain number of flights in order to retain airport slots. Airlines are also putting fewer passengers on some planes, so they can fly with fewer flight attendants and have more crew on standby in case of delays elsewhere. The other approach is for airlines to staff up. The government has made it easier for new hires to get confirmation of their employment history from Britain’s tax authority: that helps them to get security passes more quickly. It is useful, too, that destination countries are scrapping covid-testing requirements that previously lengthened waiting times at check-in. Even so, holiday-makers should bet on more misery this summer. Battles over pay threaten aviation as well as other parts of Britain’s transport network. On June 23rd 500 British Airways check-in staff at Heathrow voted to strike over pandemic-related pay cuts that the airline has not fully restored. Even if the worst of the pandemic is over, covid-19 is not. About one in 30 Britons tested positive in the week ending June 24th, up from 1 in 40 the week before. That points to more staff taking unplanned absences. And whatever happens, the aviation industry will have a remarkably inexperienced workforce. Swissport, an aircraft ground handling firm, estimates half of its staff this summer will be new to the job. An experienced baggage-handler knows how to grab a checked suitcase off a plane, should a passenger not get on the flight. A less experienced handler will take longer. Enjoy your flight.■