AMERICA’S HERITAGE as the world’s dominant power in the semiconductor industry is etched in the name of its most famous tech hub, Silicon Valley. Over the decades, though, the art of crafting microchips out of silicon wafers has become a truly global endeavour. American firms are still leaders in designing the devices. But the Netherlands produces the most critical machinery for making them, while Taiwan, South Korea and, increasingly, China churn them out. In the coming days President Joe Biden will sign into law a bill aimed at shoring up America’s position in the semiconductor industry and bringing more manufacturing of microchips back to the country. Whether or not the law achieves that, it is the clearest example yet of the more muscular industrial policy now in fashion in America (as in much of the rest of the world). The CHIPS and Science Act, as it is formally known, took a tortuous path through Congress. It was first proposed in 2020 when Donald Trump was still in the White House. Over time it expanded into a much larger piece of legislation, presented as America’s response to the challenge of an aggressive Chinese state intent on dominating the industries of the future. In its final version, the centrepiece of the law is $52bn in subsidies and incentives to develop semiconductor manufacturing capacity in America. Most of the remaining $200bn-plus will go towards broader scientific research, with a focus on cutting-edge fields such as artificial intelligence and fusion energy. The term “moonshot” is overused in describing ambitious high-tech initiatives. In this case it is entirely apt, at least in a financial sense. In inflation-adjusted terms, the research-and-development funding contained in the act slightly exceeds the investments of Project Apollo, the 1960s spaceflight programme that ultimately landed the first people on the moon, according to Sarah Bauerle Danzman of Indiana University Bloomington. Still, critics doubt that the impact of the CHIPS Act will be similarly far-reaching. The biggest single slug of cash, some $39bn, will serve as financial assistance for building and improving semiconductor fabrication facilities in America. Yet there is a reason that such manufacturing has moved to other countries over the years: higher labour costs in America mean that its advantage lies in more sophisticated parts of the supply chain, such as design software and fundamental research. Morris Chang, founder of TSMC, a Taiwanese company that makes most of the world’s advanced chips, has predicted that the American push will be “a wasteful, expensive exercise in futility”. Within the industry in America there is grumbling that the lion’s share of cash will flow to older-guard manufacturers, notably Intel, rather than companies such as Qualcomm and Nvidia that design their own chips but use partners to make them. Supporters of the act are both more optimistic and, they believe, realistic. They argue that the vast pool of new funding for scientific research, if well managed, could yield untold innovations. Yet they also concede that America will never recover its dominance in semiconductor manufacturing. Rather, the goal is to bring more assembly back to the country as a hedge against excessive reliance on supplies from abroad. Semiconductors are integral to anything that contains electronics—from fridges to smartphones and cars to modern weapons systems—which means dispersed global production networks are seen as a risk. America is far from alone in this thinking. In February the European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, proposed a new law that aims to generate public and private investment worth nearly $50bn in semiconductor research and production. China, meanwhile, is estimated to have already funnelled $150bn to its industry. The national-security dimensions of microchips made the CHIPS Act a rare instance of broad political agreement in America. The bill passed with a 64-33 vote in the Senate; by the standards of today’s polarisation, that reflects a strong degree of bipartisanship. In the House, 24 Republicans voted for the legislation, despite last-minute whipping against it by their leadership, who were smarting over an unexpected tax-and-spending bill sprung on them by the Democrats. In the end, it was as much the sight of America’s allies investing in semiconductors as it was the fear of China that helped concentrate minds in Congress. “France, Germany, Singapore, Japan: all of these other countries are providing incentives for chip companies to build there,” Gina Raimondo, America’s commerce secretary, said on CBS television on July 24th. “We cannot afford to be in this vulnerable position. We need to be able to protect ourselves.”■