ON JULY 22ND, amid relentless fighting, Ukraine and Russia managed to find some common ground. With the help of the United Nations and Turkey, they agreed to reopen Ukrainian ports on the Black Sea—which have been blockaded by Russian forces—for food exports. António Guterres, the UN’s secretary-general, called the deal a “beacon in the Black Sea”. He believes it will alleviate the global food crisis, which has pushed 50m people to the brink of famine. But just a day after the announcement, Russian missiles struck Odessa, a Ukrainian port city; on July 26th, local officials reported more such attacks. Will the agreement be implemented? And if this does, will it relieve hunger? The deal should in theory allow Ukraine to export about 5m tonnes of food every month (it is currently exporting perhaps 2m tonnes over land and down the Danube river, both far more restricted routes than the Black Sea). Some 20m tonnes of grain are stuck at its ports. Another 60m is expected to be available for export after this summer’s harvest. The effect of all this could prove momentous. According to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), around 40 countries—including many of the world’s poorest—rely on Ukraine and Russia for more than 30% of their wheat imports. Some, such as Eritrea and Somalia, depend on them for nearly all their wheat imports (see chart). The deal might also help to further rein in global food prices, which have been cooling in recent months. The FAO’s Food Price Index declined for the third consecutive month in June largely because of increased cereal output. A bumper harvest in Australia and favourable crop conditions in other wheat-producing countries had brought down the price of wheat to just above pre-war levels. The announcement of the grain deal between Russia and Ukraine pushed it below that benchmark. Yet uncertainties abound. For one, it is unclear whether Russia will stick to the bargain and allow ships to leave Black Sea ports. Moving the grain also presents logistical challenges. Shipping companies and insurers may be reluctant to get involved while fighting continues. Ports, damaged by the war, may not be operating at full capacity. The ships that do leave will need to follow a set path to avoid mines laid by Ukraine to thwart Russian naval attacks. It is not clear when the necessary demining will be done, or by whom. And Turkey, with the UN’s support, will need to inspect ships to allay Russian fears of weapons smuggling. A joint co-ordination centre has been established in Istanbul and officials claim that the first ships may depart within days. Even if they do, doubts over the deal’s implementation may push up food prices again—after the attacks in Odessa, for example, wheat prices leapt. Uncertainty will add to other long-term risk factors. The prices of agricultural inputs, such as fuel and fertiliser, remain high. Supply chains are snarled, partly because of the lingering effect of covid-19. Climate change, through more severe heatwaves and droughts, threatens to constrain grain supply and drive up prices. Misguided government responses, such as export controls and stockpiling, are adding to the pressure. All this could easily outweigh any potential price benefit from the grain deal. Moreover, the roots of hunger in many poor countries extend far beyond the war in Ukraine. Local conflicts, such as those in Ethiopia, Somalia and Yemen, are causing starvation; economic collapse in Sri Lanka has left many formerly middle-class citizens skipping meals. In these places, the beacon of Black Sea may seem too distant. ■ More from The Economist explains:The increase in simultaneous heatwavesWhere will Ukraine store its grain?What is stagflation, and might it make a comeback?