One of the most complex problems that Britain faces is climate change. The simplest element in the periodic table is increasingly seen as part of the answer. Low-carbon hydrogen can be made either from natural gas, with the carbon that is emitted captured and stored underground (“blue hydrogen”), or from water, using an electrolyser powered by renewable energy (“green hydrogen”). Hydrogen can help decarbonise activities that cannot easily be electrified. These include industrial processes that require high temperatures, like steelmaking; and forms of transport, including shipping, that require greater ranges than electric vehicles can manage. Last year Britain became the 12th country to release a hydrogen strategy. It called for 5gw of low-carbon hydrogen-production capacity by 2030—enough for around 2% of current energy demand. In April the government doubled that goal. Britain, it thinks, can build a “thriving hydrogen economy”, both domestically and by exporting new technology. To do so, plenty of cash is on offer. A £240m ($290m) Net Zero Hydrogen Fund will help production projects get off the ground; a “hydrogen business model” will offer price support to low-carbon hydrogen producers. Much of the money will go to two planned “clusters”: HyNet, in the north-west of England, and the East Coast Cluster, around the Humber and Teesside. These regions not only have a big industrial base, including steelmaking, but already make use of lots of hydrogen: it is a component in chemical reactions for refining and the production of fertiliser and methanol. Almost all this hydrogen is the dirty “grey” sort, which is made from natural gas but does nothing about the carbon dioxide thereby emitted. But producers of cleaner forms of hydrogen in these regions will be close to potential customers, and can tap into existing infrastructure. The government’s proposed price-support mechanism is also savvy. This is a variant of the “contracts for difference” approach it has used to support offshore wind, which guarantees low-carbon producers a certain price by topping up the market price of hydrogen. In theory, such an approach will allow low-carbon hydrogen to compete with grey hydrogen. As cleaner hydrogen becomes cheaper, support will be withdrawn. Where things get more heated is over which form of low-carbon hydrogen to back, and where it should be used. Start with what counts as “clean” hydrogen. Britain is pursuing both blue and green technologies. HyNet and the East Coast Cluster are backed by Essar and Equinor, two fossil-fuel companies, respectively; both clusters’ flagship projects are blue-hydrogen plants. That has prompted criticism from green-hydrogen advocates. Blue hydrogen can never be completely emissions-free, they say. It relies on natural gas, which is volatile in price and insecure in supply—about half of Britain’s gas is imported. That makes it a “fuel-import strategy”, according to Chris Jackson of Protium, a green-hydrogen company. Mr Jackson and other advocates want the government instead to focus on hydrogen from electrolysers, which can be powered by renewable electricity. Electrolysers can be placed next to the point of use, without the need for hydrogen pipelines, and the technology is also a promising candidate for exports. The government ought to start with the technology it wants to end up with, lest it “end up with stranded assets”, says Graham Cooley of ITM Power, a Sheffield-based electrolyser manufacturer. Blue-hydrogen advocates retort that things will be kept clean by the government’s low-carbon hydrogen standard, which sets a cap on the emissions that hydrogen-makers can produce to be eligible for subsidies. Blue hydrogen might also encourage the construction of carbon-capture-and-storage infrastructure that can be used for other purposes. The East Coast Cluster, for instance, could play an important role in dumping carbon under the North Sea. Above all, blue-hydrogen supporters rightly say that theirs is the only technology that can rapidly produce clean hydrogen at scale: there is simply not enough renewable electricity available to make the green hydrogen required. To produce 10gw of green hydrogen would require about 126TWh of renewable electricity. In 2020 Britain produced just 312twh of renewable electricity overall. That argues for a pragmatic approach to setting hydrogen targets. Britain’s mandated plan for half of hydrogen-production capacity in 2030 to be green may need tweaking. Demand is crucial, too. The government has suggested that low-carbon hydrogen could be blended into the gas network, filling consumers’ pipes with a 20/80 hydrogen/gas blend. Because of hydrogen’s low volumetric energy density—one cubic litre of hydrogen contains about a third as much energy as the equivalent volume of natural gas—blending would lead to only a 7% reduction in emissions, even if only green hydrogen is used. But by creating a pathway to scaling up, it could stimulate more production more quickly. Other ideas for scaling demand are less sensible. The government wants to explore using pure hydrogen for heat, an idea that Michael Liebrich, an energy analyst, calls “stupid”. Safe use of pure hydrogen would mean replacing valves, pipes and appliances in every home, and would still be less efficient than using an electric heat-pump. The government is also pushing hydrogen buses and vans, another application which Mr Liebrich thinks is better suited to electrification. Better to encourage the use of hydrogen as an energy storage medium to help overcome the peaks and troughs of an all-renewables grid. When renewable energy is plentiful, electrolysers can be turned on, producing hydrogen which is then stored. When it is scarce, that hydrogen can be burned in a power station or used in fuel cells to generate electricity. In the short term, the hydrogen industry also worries about Britain’s commitment to its strategy. Might the next prime minister delay or backtrack on hydrogen plans? Now that the promise of incentives exists, says Mr Cooley, already-planned projects will not begin until they are actually available. The hydrogen strategy has its flaws, but a greater problem would be if it did not get off the ground at all.■