ABE SHINZO, Japan’s former prime minister, was shot on Friday morning during a campaign speech in the western city of Nara. Mr Abe was rushed to hospital; officials say he was in cardiopulmonary arrest and showed no vital signs. The suspected shooter has been arrested and a gun recovered. The assassination attempt sent shockwaves through Japan, where both gun crime and political violence are extremely rare. As prime minister from 2012 to 2020, Mr Abe transformed his country, serving longer than any other Japanese leader in the post-war era. He pushed Japan to play a more prominent global role and to take a more active role in its own defence, a shift from decades of pacifism following the second world war. After stepping down because of the recurrence of a chronic illness, he returned to Japan’s parliament and remained a major presence in Japanese politics, heading the largest faction in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). From that perch, he has continued to argue for Japan to reinforce its military, faced as it is with a rising China, a bellicose North Korea, a hostile Russia and a less reliable America. In a recent interview with The Economist, Mr Abe argued that Japan “must take responsibility for peace and stability” and break with the mindset of seeing an “ideal world”. Yet, as the world around Japan has become ever more turbulent, Japan itself has remained in recent years an oasis of domestic political stability. Though some of Mr Abe’s security policies generated large protests in 2015, demonstrations remained peaceful. Japanese politicians typically mingle closely with voters and travel with far less security than many of their counterparts elsewhere. Footage of the attempted assassination showed Mr Abe making a stump speech for an LDP candidate in upper-house elections scheduled for July 10th. He was standing before the crowd with no barriers before shots rang out from behind him. Photographs show him supine on the road, blood staining his white shirt. Japanese media have identified the suspect as a Japanese man in his 40s. The shooter’s motives remain unknown. In an instant, the shooting shattered Japan’s sense of internal security. “I can’t stop shaking,” reads one viral tweet. “Japan is no longer safe and peaceful.” Kishida Fumio, the current prime minister, was also on the campaign trail in northern Japan and rushed back to the capital as the government set up a crisis-management centre. LDP members have called the incident an act of “terrorism” that cannot be forgiven. Opposition parties have called off their campaign events and denounced the violence. The shocking events are likely to reshape the country’s politics far beyond this weekend’s vote, which may be postponed. “I feel a sense of crisis, that the foundation of our democracy is shattered,” wrote Hirakawa Eri, a prominent political journalist. Yet the assasination attempt is not entirely without precedent. Mr Abe long modelled himself after his grandfather, Kishi Nobusuke, who served as Japan’s prime minister during a turbulent period from 1957 to 1960. Mr Kishi spearheaded the controversial passage of a new security treaty with America in 1960, in defiance of mass street protests. Just one month after the treaty was adopted, an assailant stabbed Mr Kishi in the thigh six times. He survived. Mr Abe’s fate remains unknown. ■