The eclectic ensemble known as the Sun Ra Arkestra released “Swirling”, their first studio album in more than 20 years, in October 2020. The Grammy-nominated record blends blues, funk, jazz, swing and even punk in a way that feels modern and original. In fact, all but one of the compositions on “Swirling” are reworked from compositions dating back to the 1960s and 70s; current members of the group—some of whom hadn’t yet picked up an instrument when the songs were originally recorded—added new melodies, lyrics and riffs. That restless, searching creativity is part of the enduring appeal of the Sun Ra Arkestra, which was founded in the 1950s by Herman Poole Blount. He changed his name to Le Sony’r Ra—Sun Ra, after the Egyptian god, for short—in his 30s. Ra went on to become one of the most influential cultural figures of the 20th century, releasing more than 100 albums of idiosyncratic, eccentric jazz before he died in 1993. Ra was an early adopter of the synthesiser and electronic instruments, and he used them to produce an otherworldly, psychedelic sound. The members of his Arkestra lived together, first in New York, then in Philadelphia. The house in Philadelphia was recently designated as a landmark by the Philadelphia Historical Commission, and some members of the Arkestra still live there today. The group—a rotating cast of between 12 and 20 people—pressed their own vinyls, designed their own album art and cooked and cleaned together. Ra ran a tight ship: drugs or alcohol were not allowed in the house, and rehearsals were often rumoured to last for 24 hours. While the Arkestra and its members are not household names, the group’s influence on contemporary music and culture cannot be overstated. They have been the subject of multiple films, including “Space is the Place” (1974), a fiction feature based on Ra’s preoccupation with outer space, and “Sun Ra: A Joyful Noise” (1980), which followed the group during rehearsals and performances in the 1970s. They have inspired exhibitions in America and Britain. Artists that have cited them as an influence range from Sonic Youth to Lady Gaga. In 2002 Yo La Tengo, a rock group, released four reworked versions of “Nuclear War”, one of the Arkestra’s more obscure hits from 1983. Thundercat’s “It Is What It Is” (2020) clearly channels the Arkestra’s spirit through its densely layered composition, soaring saxophone and lyrical references to the cosmos. At first the group seemed to have been beamed in from another dimension. Ra asserted that he was born on Saturn and delivered to Earth, and his cosmic mythology was a precursor to what is known as Afrofuturism, a cultural and social movement that draws together non-Western mythologies and mysticism with science fiction, offering a futuristic vision of a world which centres black people and their experiences. Tracks with lyrics, such as “Enlightenment”, often had a cosmic bent: Vibrations come from the Space WorldIs of the Cosmic Starry DimensionEnlightenment is my TomorrowIt has no planes of Sorrow. This year the band, under Marshall Allen’s stewardship (pictured), have been able to perform their raucous music to audiences in America and Europe. Their sets are marked by ominous basslines, synthesiser warbles and ritualistic chants. During tracks such as “Astro Black”, members of the Arkestra walk out into the audience to play or writhe around on the floor. They don glittering robes, spaceman suits and headdresses, moving between multiple instruments in the space of a few minutes. Even though the group continually rehearses, they also devise compositions live on stage, with one member incorporating another’s mistake into the next bar. “There’s a lot of joy, for us and for the audience, when we walk out into a room and play,” says Vincent Chancey, who plays French horn. In London guests offered spontaneous applause and whoops throughout the frenetic, freewheeling set. The audience was notably multi-generational, made up of both concertgoers who might have seen the Arkestra play when Ra was still alive, and those who hadn’t been born at the time of his death. “In 1976, when I joined the band, the music was much more eclectic, a bit more intellectual, and our audiences were much older, too,” says Mr Chancey. “But we’ve noticed that in the past 15 years, our audiences are made up of a lot of people under 30.” He reckons that younger audiences may be more open to the kind of genre-swapping and free expression that the Arkestra specialises in. As the group shape-shifts, their sound continues to develop, too, and so they gain new fans. “Many of the current members of the Arkestra never played with Ra. They’ve helped us move forward,” he says. “Now we play with rock bands, we opened for Solange [the sister of Beyoncé]. We’ve had young, black hip-hop artists coming to us to collaborate.” It is a rare group that remains avant-garde for more than half a century. But as long as there are fans interested in what the Arkestra does, there will always be an Arkestra. As Ra says in “Space is the Place”: “We work on the other side of time.” ■