“There’s a lot more to Patpong than sex,” Michael Messner says. The district lies east of the Chao Phraya river in Thailand’s capital city; two parallel streets host night markets, bars, clubs and sex shows. People forget, Mr Messner says, that “the cia ran its first Bangkok safe house here, while American corporations like Pan Am turned the street into the city’s main business district during the cold war. Tony Poe—the cia agent Marlon Brando’s Colonel Kurtz in ‘Apocalypse Now’ is based on—drank on this street.” The area has attracted creative types as well as entrepreneurs and spooks. The likes of David Bowie and Jean-Claude Van Damme filmed projects there in the 1980s. In short, Mr Messner argues, “there’s a thick historical fabric to this area that involves important people and geopolitical events, secrets related to drugs and covert war…followed by a lot of sex.” He felt there was an opportunity to enlighten people as to the locale’s dual history. He opened the Patpong Museum in late 2019 but closed it shortly after as Thailand closed its borders to combat the covid-19 outbreak. The venue has recently reopened, with a permanent collection alongside an exhibition about Charles Sobhraj, a serial killer who found some of his victims in Patpong. Mr Messner, who was born in Austria, is the son of Ernst Fuchs, an artist and one of the founders of the Vienna School of Fantastic Realism. While Mr Messner was managing the Fuchs family’s private museum in Vienna in the 1990s, he frequently travelled to Bangkok on behalf of his father to have large bronzes cast. In 2001 he met his wife, Jittra, bought a bar in Patpong and befriended Praphan Poumchaosuan, better known as “Uncle Vijit”, a barber and prominent figure in the district. Poumchaosuan, who died in 2020, acted as a guide to Thai culture, society and politics, conveying “pearls of history that no one else cared about. I thought someone should preserve this story.” It took Mr Messner 17 years to make the museum a reality. The institution only admits adults but its content will outrage only the truly prudish: Mr Messner says he was mindful of visitors’ sensibilities when curating the objects on display. Visitors enter the museum through a circular Chinese moon gate as the former owner of the area, Luang Patpongpanich, was an immigrant from Hainan. (He bought the land, then used to grow bananas, in 1946.) The artefacts are arranged chronologically; placards, newspaper clippings and interactive digital content depict the area’s development. Exhibits include an imposing wooden lingam (a phallic object which symbolises the Hindu god Shiva and is considered a lucky charm by Thais) and the telephone switchboard of Patpong’s erstwhile Plaza Hotel, the first in the city to offer international calls. Thai-language cartoons published by the United States Information Agency feature clumsy anti-communist propaganda; America saw the country as a bulwark against Chinese and Vietnamese aggression. As the exhibition on Sobhraj indicates, the museum does not shy away from the more sordid history of the neighbourhood. There is vintage imagery from the area’s many bars, of katoeys (transgender women) and the gay and fetish scene. Contemporary erotic art hangs on the walls. And the museum’s centrepiece is a replica of the Grand Prix, the first go-go bar to open in Patpong in 1969. If they so wish, visitors can enjoy a cold beer while watching dancers’ never-ending gyrations on a floor-to-ceiling screen. The Patpong Museum has already proved a success. Tripadvisor has labelled it a “Travellers’ Choice” and it won Thailand’s best community museum award, an unlikely government honour, in 2021. The museum hosts literary readings and showcases the work of Thai artists such as Headache Stencil and Tawan Wattuya. Across the road, Mr Messner will open a reading room with 3,000 books on erotica in 2023. The project was conceived in collaboration with the Jaski Gallery in Amsterdam. Some Thais, Mr Messner says, were embarrassed when a foreigner opened a museum documenting parts of the country’s less illustrious history. Many Bangkokians consider the city’s garish red-light districts to be dangerous. But university students, academics and art collectors have since come to Patpong to learn about its history. Mr Messner hopes that others will follow, and that the area might become known for its high-minded offerings as well as hedonistic ones. ■